

[1/216 b3303073x_0002_0001.jp2]




[2/216 b3303073x_0002_0002.jp2]




[3/216 b3303073x_0002_0003.jp2]

The Library of the Wellcome Institute for the History of Medicine om et ern meme Uf \ " . A | Oe ial Pv i a Uc tnt we Vi be. bY bane H s nm, &amp; a, r ern ‘Nf Nj ; yh Fe &amp; k i ie ; ee i_J ; Veresntl” i) fs Accession Number Press Mark ar i Nn vi ft De } a ‘ t 4 ¥ f ’ \ i ee Ly


[4/216 b3303073x_0002_0004.jp2]




[5/216 b3303073x_0002_0005.jp2]

185 : CHAPTER V. LIFE-ASSURANCE. FEIGNED DISEASES. THESE two subjects are placed in the same chapter for the sake of convenience, and not on account of any great similarity which they bear to each other. LIFE-ASSURANCE, Definition— Modes of Death excepted.i—Policies vitiated by Omissions or fraudulent Concealments.— Questions as to the Influence of Disease and Habits of living on the Duration of Life-—Case in illustration. Life-assurance is thus defined: “ An insurance upon life is a con- tract by which the underwriter for a certain sum, proportioned to the age, health, profession, and other circumstances of that person whose life is the object of insurance, engages that the person shall not die within the time limited in the policy ; or if he do, that he will pay a sum of money to him in whose favour the policy was granted.” * When the insurance is for the whole period of life, the annual payment will of course depend upon the number of years the insured party ‘may be expected to live, and this is a matter of calculation deduced from registers of mortality. Annuities are granted on the same principles as insurances, the only difference being that the underwriter, for a sum paid at once, agrees to pay the annuitant a certain sum annually during his life. In policies of insurance, exceptions are generally made of death by suicide or by the hands of justice ; and higher premiums are required where life is exposed to extraordinary risks, as during long voyages, military service, or residence in unhealthy climates. An increased payment is also demanded from those who labour under diseases tending to shorten life; and within a recent period the principle of life-assurance has been extended to persons actually suffering from ~ acute disease. Assurance offices employ a physician or surgeon, or both, to ex- amine and report upon the state of health of all persons applying to the office, and information is also sought from the ordinary medical attendant, or from some medical man chosen as referee. - The offices are in the habit of addressing to the medical referee a * Park on Insurance.


[6/216 b3303073x_0002_0006.jp2]

186 LIFE-ASSURANCE. long list of questions relating to his own opportunities of knowing the party, his present and past state of health, his hereditary predisposi- tions, his habits of life, the diseases with which he may have been attacked. Has he suffered from gout, spitting of blood, asthma, con- sumption, or other pulmonary complaint ; from fits, or mental derange- ment? Has he had the small-pox or cow-pox? These questions are so framed as to elicit all the information necessary in order to deter- mine the degree of risk attending the contemplated insurance. The contract entered into in the policy of insurance may be rendered void by a variety of causes ; among which may be mentioned, an omission on the part of the person whose life is the subject of insurance to name his medical attendants, or the attacks of illness which he may have had ; and fraudulent concealments on his part, or on that of his medical attendant or referee. Questions are also fre- quently raised as to the tendency of particular diseases, such as gout, indigestion, affections of the chest, mental imbecility, &amp;c. to shorten life. The effect of certain habits and modes of living, such as intoxi- cation, opium-eating, &amp;c., have, in like manner, been subjects of litigation. The effects of disease and of habits of living on the duration of life, belong to the subject of hygiéne, and the reader is referred for infor- mation concerning them to works on that science. The subject of life-assurance is not one which admits of the esta- blishment of any general principles, and each case must rest on its own merits. A single example, quoted from Paris and Fonblanque,* will illustrate the nature of the questions which are likely to arise in courts of law in reference to policies of insurance. The life of Sir James Ross was insured for one year, from October 1759 to October 1760, and he was warranted in good health at the time of making the policy. One fact, however, was not men- tioned to the insurer, viz. that Sir James had received a wound in battle, twelve years before the date of the insurance. The wound was in the loins, and had occasioned a partial relaxation or palsy, so that he could not retain his urine or feces. Sir James died of a malignant fever, within the time of the insurance. All the physicians and surgeons who were examined for the plaintiff swore, that the wound had no sort of connexion with the fever; and that the want of retention was not a disorder which shortened life, but he might, notwithstanding that, have lived to the common age of man; and the surgeons who opened him said, that his intestines were all sound. There was one physician examined, for the defendant, who said that the retention was paralytic ; but being asked to explain, he said it was only a local palsy, arising from the wound, but did not affect life ; but, on the whole, he did not look upon him as a good life. Lord Mansfield, before whom the case was tried, observed, * The * Medical Jurisprudence, vol. i. p. 383.


[7/216 b3303073x_0002_0007.jp2]

FEIGNED DISEASES. 187 question of fraud cannot exist in this case. When a man makes insurance upon a life generally, without any representation of the state of the life insured, the insurer takes all the risk, unless there was some fraud in the person insuring, either by his suppressing some circumstance which he knew, or alleging what was false. But if the person insuring knew no more than the insurer, the. latter takes the risk. When an insurance is upon a representation, every material circumstance should be mentioned, such as age, way of life, &amp;c. But where there is a warranty, then nothing need be told, but it must, in general, be proved if litigated, that the life was in fact a good one, and so tt may be, though he have a particular infirmity. The only question is, whether he was in a reasonable good state of health, and such a life as ought to be insured on common terms?” The jury, upon this direction, without going out of court, found a verdict for the plaintiff. This case will suffice to show the general nature of the questions which are apt to arise, where a life is insured upon a general war- ranty, no detailed list of questions having been submitted to the referee. The definite questions now addressed to the referee tend to limit the number of actions brought on the ground of unintentional con- cealment ; but among the questions contained in the printed papers of the insurance offices there are not a few which the medical man may answer in perfect good faith, but concerning which disputes may arise. Thus the party effecting an insurance may suffer from indi- gestion, or some other trifling disorder ; and yet the medical referee may make no mention of the fact, simply because he does not think it has a tendency to shorten life. Nevertheless, this may become a question in a court of law, and may have to be decided by the evi- dence of medical men. On this subject of life-assurance it is only necessary to add, that the medical referee should be very careful not to withhold any state- ment which may seem to him at all important. Otherwise his repu- tation for knowledge or integrity may suffer injury. FEIGNED DISEASES. Motives to this form of Imposition—Classified List of Feigned Dis- eases.—1. Diseases and Defects palpable to the Senses.—2. Diseases and Defects not palpable to the Senses.—3. Discases consisting of Groups of Symptoms.—General Rules for the Detection of Feigned Diseases.—Cases in illustration of the Skill with which Diseases are sometimes imitated. Of the many inquiries which the medical man may be called upon to institute, none are more difficult than those relating to diseases supposed to be feigned. The occasions for such examinations are


[8/216 b3303073x_0002_0008.jp2]

parochial relief, or to impose on the benevolence of private persons, ee ee ee ee 2. The hope of Gain.—Some, for instance, feign illness to obtain 188 FEIGNED DISEASES. also of frequent occurrence, for the motives to this form of deceit are very numerous. Of these motives, the following are the principal : 1. Release from Obligations—Thus the soldier will pretend to be ill to escape severe military duty, or to obtain his discharge from the service ; and the mendicant to avoid labour. others to defraud benefit societies, to procure the comforts of an hos- pital, or to obtain compensation for some pretended injury. 3. Zo procure a release from Confinement, or an exemption from Punishment. And, 4. There are many persons, particularly females, who with- out hope of gain, feign diseases in order to excite public interest and curiosity, or private sympathy. Such deceptions are often practised by young and unmarried females, even of the better orders. The persons most prone to feign diseases are those who congregate much ; as soldiers, sailors, beggars, and school boys and girls. But the best school for feigned diseases is the army, and military impositions practised by soldiers have appropriated to themselves the name of Malingery. This art has been brought to a high state of perfection in France, where it is a great object for a man to escape the conscrip- tion, and Foderé observes of the time when the conscription was in full force in that country, “that it was brought to such perfection, as to render it as difficult to detect a feigned disease, as to cure a real one.”* Feigned diseases and defects are extremely numerous, and the sub- ject involves so many details, that some arrangement is absolutely necessary. Itis proposed to treat it in the following order. In the first place, a classified list will be given of the principal diseases and defects which have been feigned; this will be followed by rules for the detection of these impositions; to which will be added a few cases illustrative of the difficulty which the medical man occasionally encounters. CLASSIFIED LIST OF FEIGNED DISEASES AND DEFECTS. It is difficult to form any classification of feigned diseases which shall be free from many objections. ‘The most obvious is into, 1. Dis- eases obvious to the senses; 2. Diseases and defects of a simple kind, not obvious to the senses, but depending upon the description of the impostor; and, 3. Diseases of a more complicated nature, consisting of groups of symptoms. 1. Diseases obvious to the Senses. This class contains the following subdivisions. «a. Increased and diminished size of parts. 06. Malformations. ce. Wounds, ulcers, and * Vol. ii,, p. 452. op. PP


[9/216 b3303073x_0002_0009.jp2]

DISEASES OBVIOUS TO THE SENSES. 189 superficial inflammations. d. Discharges. e. Spasmodic affections. J. Paralytic affections, and those accompanied with loss of power. a. Increased and diminished Size of Parts.—This head includes tumours of various kinds. A favourite mode of producing tumours is the injection of air beneath the cellular membrane. It has been in- jected beneath the skin of the abdomen to imitate ascites, into that of the scrotum to imitate hydrocele and hernia, under the scalp to give the appearance of hydrocephalus, into various parts of the limbs, with the assistance of ligatures, to imitate local swellings. This mode of imposition may be detected by the touch, and by uncovering the tu- mour and searching for the aperture through which the air has been introduced, which aperture is generally found covered by a small piece of plaster. Pressure is another means by which tumours are pro- duced. Swellings on various parts of the limbs, anasarca, varicose ves, and an appearance resembling elephantiasis, have been produced by ligatures ; and edema of the upper extremity by hanging the limb over the back of a chair previous to the medical visits. In such cases search must be made for the marks of the pressure which has been used. Tympanites has been imitated by swallowing air, or by taking large quantities of chalk and vinegar. In such cases, a solution of Glauber’s salts with weak tobacco-water has proved very efficacious in the hands of Dr. O’Hara. The appearance of an abdominal tumour has also been produced by forcibly elevating the spine at the loins whilst lying on the back. Tumours in different situations have been imi- tated by the use of substances extraneous to the body, as polypus of the nose, by means of the testes of a cock, or the kidneys of a rabbit retained in the nostril, and sometimes impregnated with foetid juices. Strong sternutatories will assist us in unmasking these cases. Pro- lapsus ani has been imitated by the gut of an ox or of a sheep, or by the everted anal extremity of the bowel of a colt or hog. In one case mentioned by Percy and Laurent, prolapsus ani was actually produced by introducing into the anus the bladder of a sheep, distending it with air and forcibly retracting it. Prolapsus uteri has been imitated by similar means; Hydatids of the uterus by vesicles prepared from the intestines of a pig ; malignant tumours by a sponge soaked in various colouring matters; and Hemorrhoids by the bladders of rats or small fish partly introduced into the rectum. Hernia has been feigned by the injection of air, by the forcible retraction of the testicles towards the rings, and, in one case, the sac was imitated by the bladder of an ox. Cancer has been imitated by a cow’s spleen, and by a sponge moistened with milk, and fixed under the armpit. Swellings of the Joints, intended to represent white swellings, have been produced by various acrid plants, as the ranunculus acris and sceleratus applied to the part. Enlargement of the abdomen in the female has been simu- lated by apad. Partial Atrophy may be produced by pressure. The frauds contained under this head require, for their detection, a careful examination of the part itself, by the eye and by the touch.


[10/216 b3303073x_0002_0010.jp2]

190 FEIGNED DISEASES. 6. Malformations,—Lateral curvature of the spine has been imi- tated. The characters of this simulated deformity are, that it is always in the dorso-lumbar region, the curve always single, the con- vex side free from gibbosity, there are folds of skin, generally two in number, on the concave side, the haunch of which is raised so as to give to the extremity the appearance of being shortened. In morbid deviations, on the contrary, the seat of curvature is variable, there is more than one curvature, the convex side is gibbous, the folds of skin, if present, are very slightly marked, there is little or no inclination of the trunk, or elevation of the haunch.* Gbbosity, or elevation of the shoulders, wry neck, and various contractions of the limbs or joints, have also been feigned. This is done by obstinate and long-continued flexion of the part, aided by inaction and the use of tight bandages. Sometimes the contraction is attributed to a burn or previous injury, in which case a wound is made to bear out the assertion. More commonly these contractions are attributed to a previous attack of rheumatism. - In cases of contraction, there is gene- rally ground for suspicion when there is no cicatrix, and no atrophy of the limb, but on the contrary, tension, hardness, and swelling of the con- tracted muscles. Many means have been proposed for the detection of this class of impositions, such as compressing by a tourniquet the nerves supplying the contracted muscles; applying a wet bandage as to prevent the continuance of their contraction; endeavouring to move the limb during natural sleep, or during that produced by narcotics ; the examination of the limb during the sickness and weakness pro- duced by an emetic, or by intoxication; the electric shock; gradual and repeated tension of the contracted limb by means of a pulley or weights; making a sudden extension whilst the attention is engaged ; recommending the warm climate of the coast of Africa as a cure, &amp;c. Dislocations may be effected intentionally. Those of the shoulder- joint and patella are the most easily accomplished. Fractures, when real, are often prevented from healing by frequent motion, leading to the formation of false joints. Their effects are also greatly aggravated. fip Disease has also been feigned, the apparent shortening of the limb being produced by strong contraction of the muscles. The actual cautery which would be properly resorted to in the real disease, will probably detect the false one. c. Wounds, Ulcers, and Superficial Inflammations. Mutilation is a very common practice in the army, and especially in regiments sub- mitted to very strict and harassing duties. In countries in which the conscription is in force, the practice is carried to an extraordinary extent. This is the case in France, and to a still greater extent in Egypt, in which unhappy country, it is stated to be difficult to meet * On Feigned and Fictitious Diseases. By Hector Gavin, M.D. These marks of distinction are quoted from Dr. Jules Guérin. Miia tek


[11/216 b3303073x_0002_0011.jp2]

with a single unmutilated male adult.* Wownds.—The distinction be- tween wounds self-inflicted and inflicted by others, or taking place acci- dentally, will be considered under the head of wounds. Bruises have been imitated by colouring materials, but not being true to nature they are easily detected by the experienced eye. Ulcers are among the most common of feigned diseases, and when they exist naturally they are often intentionally increased. The means, most commonly resorted to are corrosive acids and alkalies, caustics, corrosive subli- mate, arsenic and its sulphuret, acetate of copper, blistering plaster, quicklime, the flame of burning bodies, the ashes and chewed leaves of tobacco, the vegetable acids, especially the ranunculus acris and sceleratus, the mezereon or spurge-laurel, the euphorbium, the arum maculatum, and the juniper. Ulcers are also excited by mechanical means, as by pressure and friction. Pressure is often produced by ally in place of being produced or increased by the use of irritants, ulcers are merely feigned, as, by gluing a portion of a spleen or the skin of a frog on the part, the surface being kept moist by a sponge dipped in blood and water. The most common situation of these fictitious ulcers is the lower extremities. Ulcers artificially produced may often be detected by simple inspection of the surface and dress- ings; the sudden increase of the appearance of inflammation on and about the ulcer will naturally excite a suspicion of the use of irritants ; and the healthy appearance of the impostor will often be found at variance with the extent of ulceration. In hospitals, when there is ground for suspicion, that an ulcer is prevented from healing by the use of irritants, a wooden box completely enclosing the leg has been used with the best effect. istwla in Ano and in Perineo have been imitated by a punctured wound into which a tent covered with some irritating substance, or made of the root of the milk thistle, or of white hellebore, is introduced. A variety of cwta- neous diseases have been feigned, or intentionally produced, as lupus by the application of pounded garlic, and the juice of the euphor- bium; eryszpelas by a short application of blisters; urticaria, by eating shell-fish ; psoriasis and impetigo, by the use of strong ru- befacients ; pompholyx, by blistering plaster; scabies, by punc- tures, irritated with gunpowder; porrigo, by nitric acid dropped upon the hand, and by other irritants, as also by a paste composed of rancid butter, honey, sulphur, and a small quantity of the pow- der of cantharides; baldness has been effected by. the use of nitric acid. Variola in its eruptive stage has been imitated by punctures into which baysalt and gunpowder were afterwards rubbed. The discolouration of the skin in jaundice has been imitated by a variety of colouring materials. To this division belong certain affections of the eyes, which are ob- * Gavin, Op. cit. p. 344.


[12/216 b3303073x_0002_0012.jp2]

vious to the senses. Opiihalmia is a very important disease; as it is of frequent occurrence, and is very often artificially produced. The - mneans employed for this purpose are gonorrhceal matter, nitric acid, cor- - -Tosive sublimate, sulphate of copper, nitrate of silver, lime, pepper, snuff, bium, a blast of cold air, cantharides, friction, the introduction of frag- ments of cloth. or muslin, &amp;e. The counterfeit disease differs from the real chiefly it being confined to one eye, and that generally the right, in being“rapid in its progress, the swelling and. inflammation being chiefly 3 in the conjunctiva, and ceasing when the vision becomes im- only the privates and non-commissioned officers. The use of irri- tants in the form of powder can often be detected, as in the case of ulcers, by simple inspection. Ophthalmia tarsi has been simulated by the use of strong irritants, or by the extraction of the eyelashes. A healthy aspect of countenance would at once lead us to suspect the fraud which had been practised, as ophthalmia tarsi rarely occurs in any but the scrofulous and cachectic. Opacity of the cornea has been caused by dropping strong acid into the eye, or by introducing a frag- ment of lime or of some other strong irritant. Cataract, too, has been the lens. The operation of extraction should be performed in such cases. d. Discharges. Vomiting is a frequent factitious symptom of disease. It is effected by pressing on the pit of the stomach, by swallowing air, tickling the fauces, and by the use of emetics. Vomiting produced by these means is generally unaccompanied by that emaciation which results in disease from its long continuance. The fraud is often readily detected by the absence of the other concomitants of those diseases of which vomiting is a symptom. Various substances have been rejected from the stomach, as common water, urine, and even feeces, all of which had been previously swallowed. The larva of insects and reptiles have also been mixed with substances stated to have been vomited. Diarrhea and dysentery, too, are often feigned or produced at will; feigned, by breaking down an ordinary evacuation . and mixing it with urine; produced, by a mixture of vinegar and burnt cork, by a solution of the sulphate of iron, by drastic purgatives, or by the introduction of irritating substances into the rectum. The evacuations are sometimes tinged with blood, procured from puncture, red by logwood, green by senna, black by the deep-coloured wines of Portugal, &amp;c. A careful examination of the evacuations, the use of a separate close-stool, the inspection of the linen, and a comparison of the symptoms present with those of the simulated disease, will assist Se Se oe


[13/216 b3303073x_0002_0013.jp2]

DISEASES OBVIOUS TO THE SENSES, DISCHARGES. 193 us in discovering the fraud. Ascarides have been clumsily imitated, as in an out-patient of the King’s College Hospital, by small fragments - of thread, one of which was red. Animals have been placed in tlie © evacuations, as.a species of lizard, in a case related by Dr. Spence. Alterations in the secretion of wrize belong to this division. Alleged urinary concretions have been found to consist of sand, pebbles, pieces of quartz and flint. Fragments of brick or slate, small pebbles, &amp;c., have been introduced into the urethra to bear out. the alleged. ex-. istence of urinary calculus. Calcined bricks, coals and fragments of bone have been introduced into the vagina with the like intention. Chemical analysis, and, in most cases, mere inspection will ‘serve to unmask such impositions. Hematuria has been simulated by the ‘use of beet-root, madder, cochineal, the Indian fig, the fruit of the prick- ly pear, logwood, &amp;c.; blood has also been injected into the bladder, or mixed with the urine after it has been passed, or it has been obtained from the mucous membrane of the urethra by scratching. Heematuria may also be caused by substances taken internally, as savin, cantharides, and turpentine. The urine may be tinged of dif- ferent colours by substances taken internally, such as madder, log- wood, indigo, rhubarb, black cherries, the whortle-berry, the pulp of cassia fistula, elder rob, and ferrocyanate of potass, or iron. Milk has been added to the urine to give it a white colour. In suspected cases, the patient should be made to urinate in the presence of the medical man. The absence of the local and constitutional symptoms attending the more severe affections of the kidney and bladder would naturally excite suspicion, and assist the diagnosis. Gonorrhea has been imi- tated by the use of caustics. The menstrual discharge by staining the linen with bullock’s blood. Epistaxis has been produced by incisions. Hemoptysis is a favourite factitious disease. It is imitated by swal- lowing bullock’s blood, by holding in the mouth a sponge filled with blood, by incisions on the inside of the mouth or back of the throat, by pricking the gums, by blood sucked from other parts of the body. In other cases pastilles coloured with carmine, Armenian bole, brick- dust, and vermilion have been used for this purpose. In suspicious cases, the mouth should be carefully examined, and rinsed out with water, the rejected fluid inspected, and, if necessary, analysed: the chest also should be examined. Otorrhea is simulated by honey, pus, rancid tallow, asafcetida, or old cheese, introduced into the meatus ; it has been excited by cantharides, or by various irritating liquids. Ozena has been imitated and excited by similar means. Fetid breath and perspiration have been produced by oil of dippel, asafoetida, old cheese, putrifying fish, and the rancid oil from a cart wheel. Emetics in the one case, and ablutions in the other, with careful watching, will serve to detect the imposture. : e. Spasmodic affections. This class of diseases is frequently and successfully feigned. Hpilepsy, for various reasons, is the favourite subject or imitation, and it has the peculiar recommendation that


[14/216 b3303073x_0002_0014.jp2]

194 FEIGNED DISEASES. the impostor may be well at intervals, and assume his fits at such times as suit his convenience. In addition to the violent struggles which form the prominent feature of the true disease, impostors have contrived to inflict bruises upon different parts of their persons as evidence of former attacks, to vomit blood previously swallowed, to imitate the foam at the mouth by chewing soap, and to discharge the urine as if involuntarily. To point out the means of distinguishing the factitious from the real disease, would be to give a minute descrip- tion of the characters of an epileptic seizure. For them the reader is referred to works on the practice of medicine, and to the more volumi- nous monographs on feigned diseases. In these works, however, many means of diagnosis are pointed out which cannot be depended on. The best criterion is the entire absence of sensibility in the true epileptic seizure; while in attacks of feigned epilepsy, the use of appropriate stimulants will elicit some sign of sensibility. The stimulants recommended are, the vapours of hartshorn, or sulphurous _acid gas applied to the nose; snuff, or other sternutatories; a morsel of asafcetida introduced into the nostrils; a few drops of alcohol or turpentine poured into the eye; aloes and salt in solution, mustard, or common salt, placed in the mouth. The sudden application of hot water, or of actual flame, to the skin, has been recommended. Sharp-pointed instruments have sometimes been introduced into the flesh, but without detecting the imposition. If any mechanical sti- mulus must be resorted to, the author would strongly recommend, as free from the objection to which sharp-pointed instruments are open, flecking the feet with a wet towel. He is in the habit of employing this with advantage in cases of poisoning with opium, and has by its means roused a patient from a mesmeric slumber, when all other me- chanical stimulants and cold effusions had failed. Though he has not tried it in any case of epilepsy supposed to be feigned, he believes that it would infallibly succeed. The aspect of the epileptic is so pecu- liar, that a natural expression of countenance would excite suspicion. The time of the occurrence of the fits, the little injury attending them, the absence of the shame with which the true epileptic speaks of his disease, the history of the case,—these, and many other points that might be mentioned, will assist in distinguishing the feigned from the true disease. Convulsions. ‘These irregular actions of the muscles have been rife in all ages, partly as the result of involuntary imitation, and partly as the consequence of imposition. They are most frequent in fe- males; but are by no means confined to that sex. The chief difference between real and feigned convulsions is the possibility of the long con- tinuance of the former, and that with comparatively little exhaustion, the reverse being the case with the factitious. To discover the fraud “it is sufficient to act with force on the antagonist muscles.”* The impostor may be tired out by long watching. Local convulsive move- * Orfila, Lécons de Méd. Lég., vol. i. p. 410.


[15/216 b3303073x_0002_0015.jp2]

DISEASES OBVIOUS TO THE SENSES. SPASMODIC DISEASES, 195 ments are often feigned. I saw a case at the hospital of constant and violent convulsive action of the muscles of the abdomen, in a dis- charged soldier of the Spanish Legion. Having informed him at once of my suspicions, I desired him to call the next day, when I would examine him with more care. He did not repeat his visit, but two days afterwards I met him, quite free from his convulsions, taking an active and boisterous part in an election. Chorea, This, like other forms of convulsion, has often been the offspring of fanaticism, in- voluntary imitation, and voluntary deception. It is more easily feigned than epilepsy. When skilfully imitated the diagnosis is not easy, and many of the distinctions laid down in books are without foundation. Cold affusions and electricity, which may be used with propriety in true chorea, are not pleasant remedies for impostors, and are therefore greatly to be commended. Hysteria. It is of little con- sequence whether an attack of hysteria be feigned or not; cold affusion, which is the best remedy for the real disease, is not a pleasant application in feigned attacks. Whether it cures it or leads to its being laid aside is a matter of little moment. Catalepsy is a very rare disease, and its existence, especially in a male, may. fairly justify some degree of suspicion. I have myself met with one well- marked case of it. It occurred in a young gentleman whom I have re- peatedly seen arrested in the midst of his sports, and in attitudes most difficult to sustain. He would remain motionless for the space of one or two minutes, and then resume his play with an air of slight and transient surprise. He died in a bath, as it was thought, during a fit, Powerful stimulants, the proposal of the actual cautery while the finger is on the pulse, appending a weight to the extended limb, and cutting the string suddenly, have been recommended and practised with effect in feigned cases. In the trance which follows the mani- pulations of the magnetizer, I have, as I have stated, resorted to flecking of the feet with success. Tetanus and hydrophobia have been on rare occasions feigned, but so unsuccessfully that no more need be said about them. Some forms of tonic spasm have been feigned. Thus the fingers have been forcibly contracted, and the nails driven into the palm of the hand. By introducing a conical piece of wood, and gra- dually wearying the muscles, the imposition is readily detected. Stam- mering is often feigned. Sometimes the real defect depends upon mal- formation of the tongue or palate ; but in other instances these parts are well formed. The examination of these organs, as recommended by some authors, will not, therefore, serve as a distinction. The best distinction is founded on the fact, that stammerers hesitate little or not at all in repeating what they know by heart, and in singing. The contortions of the impostor while repeating such passages will betray him. Strabismus is easily feigned. The proposal of the modern opera- tion would often serve to unmask imposture. Nictitation and Blepha- rospasmus are unimportant and easily pretended. Dysphagia, when feigned, may be cured by the persevering use of the probang; low diet


[16/216 b3303073x_0002_0016.jp2]

196 305 FEIGNED DISEASES. and watching will complete the cure, or soon lead to detection. Stric- ture of the urethra has been feigned, but as the treatment of the real disease is not agreeable, the imposture is not likely to be persevered in. SJ. Paralytic affections, and those accompanied by loss of power.— These affections are frequently simulated. General paralysis is too dif- ficult to assume ; but every form of partial paralysis has been feigned. flemiplegia has been successfully imitated in a great number of in- stances. The previous history of the case, and a careful examination of the existing symptoms and appearances, will generally enable us to unmask the imposture. The same remarks apply to Paraphlegia, in which we have the additional negative evidence from the state of the urine, the degree of emaciation of the limb, and the state of the sensation. Local paralysis has also in many cases been successfully feigned, and here we have the additional means of diagnosis afforded by the temperature of the affected extremity. In true cases of local paralysis the palsied limb has its temperature rnuch reduced. In cases of paralysis of the fore-arm and hand, and more rarely of the entire upper or lower extremity, the discovery of a blue line on the gums will give good grounds for believing the paralysis real. Paralysis agitans. In attempting to imitate this disease the impostor generally overdoes his part. It is considered characteristic of the real disease that the patient in attempting to walk “is impelled unwillingly to adopt a running pace.” ‘The pretender on the other hand is apt to hesitate in his movements and to advance with difficulty. It happens fortunately in this, as in most diseases of this class, that the remedies proper for the disease are not agreeable ones, and where there is a good ground for suspicion, low diet will be found a useful auxiliary. Ptosis, The impostor generally makes attempts to prevent the raising of the eyelid, and this leads to detection. Insensibility, when feigned, may be detected by the use of stimulants, and the imposition will often be discovered by the inconsistent statements as to the cause.* Coma and Lethargy have been very successfully feigned, and in one or two instances the impostor has resisted every stimulant that could be thought of: in one case the operation of trephining caused merely a single groan.+ The treatment which we should be justified in resorting to if the complaint were real would prove a trying discipline to most impostors. Syncope. This scarcely admits of being feigned, for if the impostor can contrive to grow pale, he can scarcely control the action of the heart and arteries. More than one case, however, of this voluntary control over the circulation is on record, of which the best authenticated—that of Colonel Townshend—will be elsewhere referred to.f Death itself has been feigned, and in one or two cases with such success as to deceive the common observer, and, in the solitary case of * See medical arguments in the case of the Queen versus Bolam, tried at Newcastle, July 29, 1838; drawn up for the use of the solicitor and counsel for the prosecution, by Dr. Lynch.—Lancet, August 17, 1839. + Case of Phineas Adams, p. 203. + See Real and Apparent Death.


[17/216 b3303073x_0002_0017.jp2]

DISEASES NOT OBVIOUS TO THE SENSES. PAIN. 197 Colonel Townshend, so as to deceive medical men themselves. Cases of feigned hanging, drowning, poisoning, &amp;c., will be referred to under their appropriate heads. 2. DISEASES AND DEFECTS NOT OBVIOUS TO THE SENSES, BUT DE- PENDING CHIEFLY UPON THE DESCRIPTION OF THE IMPOSTOR. The principal diseases belonging to this class consist in, a, increased, and 6, diminished sensation. a. Increased Sensation—Pain. This common symptom of disease is frequently pretended. It is easily assumed and not easily de- tected. There are many external pains, such as tic-douloureux, which occur in persons otherwise, to all appearance, healthy; and there are many pains of a severe character, of which the cause is extremely obscure. Many cases also are on record in which severe pain has arisen from a cause that has escaped observation, and the sufferers have been treated as if the pain were pretended. The nature of the pain, the presence or absence of the symptoms of dis- ease with which it is ordinarily associated, the appearance of the patient, the consistent account which he gives of its origin, and pro- gress, will assist us in distinguishing real from pretended suffering. But we must guard against a hasty decision, and trust rather to time, than to experience and the rules of diagnosis, fora decision. Remark- able examples of endurance of pain are recorded. Thus, a case is re- lated by Lentin, of a female beggar who succeeded in having both her breasts removed, and then solicited the removal of one of her hands for a pretended pain in that part.* Cases are also related by Percy and Laurent, and by Foderé,ft of simulated pains, for the cure of which the patients submitted to the most severe and trying re- medies. Pain in the head, and the giddiness which often accom- pany it, are also easily feigned, and not easily proved to be so. Most persons have suffered more or less from these symptoms, which renders it the more easy to put on an expression of countenance corresponding to them. No certain rules can be laid down for dis- tinguishing the true from the false; and in the case of pains in the head, as in pains in other parts of the body, real sufferings have been mistaken for pretended ones, Rhewmatic pains in various parts of the body, especially in the loins and thighs, are often feigned. The same remarks apply to these pains as to others which are not necessarily accompanied by change in the parts affected, or by any well-marked constitutional symptom. In many works on feigned diseases, long rules are given for detecting feigned pain, and the symp- toms of almost every disease accompanied by pain are detected. All this detail is unnecessary, and of little use. Such feigned diseases can- * Beytrage zur austibenden Armeiwissenschaft. Leipzig, 1797. + Dictionaire des Sciences Méd., art. Simulation des Maladies. ¢ Légons de Méd. Lég., vol. ii. pp. 473-4.


[18/216 b3303073x_0002_0018.jp2]

198 FEIGNED DISEASES. not be detected by any but those who have extensive experience of real ones, and of accompaniments which no description can adequately con- vey, such as the expression and gesture of the countenance, and the attitude of the body. b. Diminished sensation.—A diminution or entire absence of sensa- tion is frequently pretended. Amawurosis is a favourite feigned dis- ease. It is also often produced intentionally. The substances em- ployed are the juice or extract of belladonna, hyoscyamus, or henbane, the distilled water of the spurge laurel, and the datura metel, and snuff moistened with a decoction of belladonna. The amaurosis produced by these means is not at first distinguishable from the real; but it disappears if the impostor be carefully iso- lated and watched. The disease has been very successfully feigned, and the imposture most perseveringly carried out. In one instance, related by Mahon, a recruit feigned blindness, and, after all other means had been tried without success, he was placed on the bank of a river, and ordered to walk forward, which he did. He after- wards confessed the imposture.* This was the case in reference to which Foderé made the somewhat curious remark, that the proof would have been complete if, instead of a river, the man had been placed on the edge of a precipice,—a dangerous experiment, “ if he had been really blind.” Myopia.—Short-sightedness being a disabi- lity in the army is often feigned. It may be detected by placing an open book close to the nose, or by requiring the suspected person to read print at some distance by the aid of glasses for the near-sighted. If the individual cannot read the book when thus placed, or when such glasses are used, we may be sure that the defect is feigned. Presbyopia is rarely feigned. The mode of detection is the converse of the preceding. Amblyopia, or weakness of sight, is also rarely pretended. In the army, the surest way to put a stop to these pretended defects, is to employ the subjects of them in some service for which the real defect would not unfit them. Nyctalopia.—Night-blindness. This disease is peculiar to warm climates, in which the sun’s rays have great power. There are no satisfactory means of distinguishing the true from the feigned disease, as opposite states of pupil may exist in different cases. Here, too, it is useful to find for the real or pretended nyctalope some employment for which the affection, if real, does not incapacitate him. Hemeralopia, or day-blindness. This disease is not of much import- ance. It sometimes occurs for a short time as a symptom of worms, or of other intestinal irritation. The diagnosis will depend upon our knowledge of the diseases of which it isa symptom. Deafness.—As this may occur without any change in the appearance of the external ear, it is a favourite imposition. The modes of detecting it are ob- vious. A watch should be set on the suspected person day and night, things calculated to excite interest or apprehension should be said in his presence, and the effect be carefully watched. It has been recom- * Mahon, Méd, Lég., vol. i. p. 366,


[19/216 b3303073x_0002_0019.jp2]

FEVER. 199 mended to place the hand on the pulse while any bad news, or threat of punishment, is being uttered. He should be called sharply or un- expectedly by name, or in a whisper, or he should be roused from sleep and spoken to, or a piece of money should be let fall close to him. All these, and similar tests, have often been applied in vain; sometimes, too, the loudest noises have not produced any apparent effect. In one case, related by Dunlop, a pistol was fired off close to the ear without effect; but upon the man being sent to sleep by opium, the imposition was detected on the repetition of the firing.* Dumbness. This is sometimes assumed with great perseverance. As a general rule it may be stated, that if a man not deaf can move his tongue he is not dumb. Nothing but complete paralysis can account for his being dumb. Some mutes add to pretended dumbness a feigned mutilation of the organ, which they effect by rolling the tongue back into the throat, and scratching it so as to make it bleed. A relative of the author’s detected such an imposition in the case of a man who, by means of a written paper describing his captivity among the Algerines and his mutilation by them, had excited great com- miseration. Pretending to give entire credence to the man’s tale, and taking a half-crown out of his pocket, he requested the man to show him his tongue once more, upon which he thrust his finger suddenly against the root, and the tongue rolled out. Deaf-dumbness. The combination of deafness and dumbness, though never occurring in a person previously in possession of both these faculties, is sometimes obstinately pretended. The impostor is best made to lay aside his imposture by solitary confinement and low diet. In one or two re- markable instances, men who have pretended that they were born deaf and dumb, have resisted every test, and have been discovered only by those having personal experience of the really deaf and dumb.+ 3. DISEASES OF A MORE COMPLICATED KIND, CONSISTING OF GROUPS OF SYMPTOMS. In the two foregoing divisions, those impositions have been con- sidered which consist of a single appearance or outward manifestation, tangible or visible to the senses; or of a single alleged symptom or defect, not necessarily combined with other symptoms, or which, if sometimes forming part of a disease, deserve separate consideration. It now remains to speak of instances in which whole trains of symptoms proper to certain diseases have been assumed, with more or less success. This division may be made to consist of two classes: a. Diseases of the body. 6. Diseases of the mind. a. Diseases of the Body.—Fever has been partly feigned and partly produced. Foderé states, that he has often seen impostors produce an extraordinary frequency of pulse, accompanied with chattering of the teeth and profound sighs. One of the marked symptoms of the * Beck’s Med. Jur. p. 17. + See the cases of Victor Foy, or Travanait, p. 203.


[20/216 b3303073x_0002_0020.jp2]

200 | FEIGNED DISEASES. typhoid type of fever, the brown tongue, has been artificially pro- duced. Febrile symptoms may be excited by strong stimulants, | such as wine, brandy, cantharides; and by the internal use of tobacco, which drug has a remarkable effect on the pulse; also by the intro- duction of a clove of garlic into the rectum. Violent exercise, or the strong contraction of the limbs before the visit of the physician, has been resorted to as a means of imitating fever. The tongue has been whitened by chalk, pipeclay, soap, flour, or whiting; and tinged brown by tobacco, brick-dust, liquorice, or gingerbread. Pallor of the skin has been imitated by the use of emetics, by smoking, by digitalis, or by drinking an infusion of cumin seeds. A flush, on the other hand, is produced by friction. The detection of cases of simulated ~ fever is easy. The effects are always ephemeral, and all that is neces- sary is to have the patient watched for a few hours. Agwe is often feigned, but not with much success. The effort necessary to imitate the rigors throws the impostor into a perspiration, which leads to detection. The shivering fit is not followed by the other stages. Rheumatism. The acute form is not easily feigned ; but the chronic, consisting chiefly in pain, and having no strongly marked accom- panying symptoms, has been often imitated with success. The same remarks, therefore, apply to this disease as to pain in gene- ral. Various affections of the chest are assumed by impostors. Pneumonia.—One instance of feigned pneumonia is mentioned by Dr. Gavin.* It was not very successfully assumed. The stethescope would serve at once to prove its non-existence. P/thisis—It would be difficult to deceive a careful observer, or one skilled in the use of the stethescope; but many symptoms of the disease have been suc- cessfully assumed. Hzemoptysis and mucous expectoration have been imitated in the manner already described. Emaciation may be pro- duced by abstinence, by drinking vinegar, or by sucking a copper coin ; febrile symptoms by the means just pointed out. Asthma, also, has — been imitated, but here the stethescope will assist in the detection of the imposition. Apopleay cannot be successfully feigned. The fraud is easily detected by sternutatories, or by strong stimulants. Dyspepsia. This disease is often feigned, and sometimes with success. Vomiting, gastralgia, pyrosis, and in fact all the symptoms of dyspepsia have been assumed, and the imposition has been detected only by care- ful watching. Gastritzs, or acute dyspepsia has also been assumed, but it is difficult to imitate it with success. Constant vomiting is not easily feigned, nor is the bright red tongue, often present in acute gastritis. Peritonitis, too, has been imitated, but rarely with much success. In one case in which there was a pretence of great pain increased by pressure, a dose of opium was given, and the man bore very strong pressure without being roused from sleep. Hepatitis in its chronic form is a favourite feigned disease, as it is very prevalent in hot climates, and is supposed to be of very frequent occurrence in this * Dr. Gavin on Feigned and Factitious Diseases, p. 257.”


[21/216 b3303073x_0002_0021.jp2]

MENTAL DISORDERS, | 201° country. As, however, liver diseases are now getting out of fashion at home, theyare less likely to be feigned ; but among soldiers who have served in hot climates they are still common. The dull heavy pain in the right side is easily assumed, and the pain in the shoulder, but the discoloured eye and skin, the unhealthy aspect of the countenance, and the mental depression and listlessness not so readily. Jaundice has been imitated by staining the skin with an infusion of the root of curcuma longa, or of saffron, with tincture of rhubarb, the bruised seeds of the broom, the stamina of the iris, &amp;c. Clay-coloured stools have been produced by taking a small quantity of muriatic acid, and the colour of the urine has been heightened by rhubarb. Pebbles, too, have been produced as gall-stones. It is not easy to tinge the conjunctiva yellow, nor to produce at one and the same time the yellow skin, the pale stools, and the high-coloured urine. . It must be borne in mind, however, that in the real disease the feeces are not always pale, but that occasionally they contain an excess of bile. Scurvy.—One prominent symptom of this affection is often imitated, viz., the spongy and bleeding gums. For this purpose, various irri- tating substances are used, or the gums are punctured previously to the visit. As this is but one symptom, and the others are not easily feigned, this imposition will present but little difficulty. Nephritis.— The pain which accompanies this disease has been assumed, and the assertion has been borne out by the exhibition of pebbles or fragments of brick, &amp;c. . This fraud has been mentioned under the head of urinary concretions. It is scarcely necessary to-state that it is almost impossible for an impostor to assume all the symptoms of nephritis. Much more might have been said on this division of feigned diseases, and minute rules for diagnosis might have been laid down: but want of space, and the assurance that it is not by descriptions of diseases, but by actual experience of them, that the true are to be distinguished from the false, has led to its being thus briefly handled. Those who are familiar with treatises on this subject will know how much of false diagnosis they contain. In doubtful cases, a reference to the best description of the disease supposed to be assumed is strongly re- commended, but it must be borne in mind that symptoms commonly considered as of high diagnostic value may be absent in the real affec- tion, and may lead to unjust suspicions. b. Mental Disorders.—Feigned insanity is of so much importance that it will be treated in the next chapter under the head of unsound- ness of mind. The subject of feigned diseases, as has been already stated, contains so many details, that it is impossible to treat it at length within the limits of a work on Forensic Medicine.* The following general rules will be of use to those. who are engaged in deciding on the reality of diseases supposed to be feigned. * For more detailed information, the reader may consult with advantage Dr. Gavin’s work already quoted. P


[22/216 b3303073x_0002_0022.jp2]

202 RULES FOR THE DETECTION OF FEIGNED AND FACTITIOUS DISEASES. 1. Inquire, in all cases, into the existence of motives for deception. Will the suspected person, by imposition, gain any thing he desires, or escape any thing he dreads? Is he in a position to profit in any way by deception? It is necessary, in this place, to caution the medi- cal man against concluding that a malady is real, because there is no obvious advantage in simulating it. Both men and women are in the habit of feigning from other motives than those of gain, such as sym- pathy ; and occasionally there is so complete an absence of reasonable motive, that we are forced to believe in the existence of a moral insa- nity displaying itself in this way. 2. Inquire into the previous history of the patient, and the charac- ter which he bears among those who know him best, as his comrades, or companions. It often happens that the impostor has been pre- viously noted for dishonesty, and for practices similar to those of which he is suspected. But, in other instances, men of the best character, and who have for years filled their situations with credit, have been convicted of malingering. 3. In the case of external diseases palpable to the senses, make a minute and careful inspection of the part itself, and examine it by the eye and by the touch. When there is a suspicion of the use of irri- tating substances, examine the part with care, and search the pockets, boxes, or bed of the suspected party, and if necessary isolate him so as to deprive him of the assistance of others, and of his means of decep- tion. Use equal care in inspecting substances alleged to have been discharged, and examine them, if necessary, by the microscope or by chemical tests. 4, When some defect, or disability not palpable to the senses, but depending entirely upon the assertion of the person himself, as pain, deafness, &amp;c., is assumed, we must endeavour to take him by surprise. In the case of pretended deafness, for instance, we must try to discover the imposition by sudden and unexpected noises, and by speaking to the party immediately on his being roused from sleep. 5. In cases of feigned diseases, properly so called, consisting of assemblages of several symptoms, we must examine minutely into the history and alleged causes of the disease ; compare the age, tempera- ment, and mode of life of the suspected person with the symptoms present; watch narrowly the course of the symptoms, and contrast it with the known march of the disease itself. 6. The suspected person should be visited at all hours of the day, and at times at which he does not expect to be seen. He should also be watched by those whom he is not likely to suspect. 7. No questions should be put of a nature to instruct the patient as to what we wish to know, but our inquiries should be so directed as


[23/216 b3303073x_0002_0023.jp2]

CASES IN ILLUSTRATION. 203 to lead him into incongruous statements. He should be thrown on his own invention, and be allowed to talk in his own way. ‘The sus- picions which we may entertain should be carefully concealed ; we must ourselves become dissemblers, and meet the malingerer with his own weapons. 8. Observe whether the suspected person be willing to make use of the medicines and measures prescribed for his relief. The impostor is generally less disposed to resort to the necessary means than he who is really ill. 9. Great caution is necessary in the treatment of suspicious cases. As a general rule, no measures ought to be employed which would not be justifiable on the supposition of the disease being real. But when the suspicion is very strong, low diet, isolation, and nauseous medi- cines, may be fairly resorted to. Two cases illustrative of the success and perseverance with which diseases are sometimes feigned, and of the difficulty of detection, will form a fitting conclusion to this subject. Phineas Adams, a soldier in the Somerset militia, aged eighteen years, was confined in gaol for desertion. From the 26th of April to the 8th of July, 1811, he lay in a state of insensibility, resisting every remedy, such as thrusting snuff up the nostrils, electric shocks, power- ful medicines, &amp;c. When any of his limbs were raised, they fell with the leaden weight of total inanimation. His eyes were closed, and his countenance extremely pale ; but his respiration continued free, and his pulse was of a healthy tone. The sustenance he received was eggs diluted with wine, and occasionally tea, which he sucked in through his teeth, as all attempts to open his mouth were fruitless. Pins were thrust under his finger-nails to excite sensation, but in vain. It was conjectured that his illness might be owing to a fall; and a proposal was consequently made by the surgeon to perform the operation of scalping, in order to ascertain whether there was not a depression of the bone. The operation was described by him to the parents at the bedside of their son, and it was performed—the in- cisions were made, the scalp drawn up, and the head examined. During all this time he manifested no audible sign of pain or sensi- bility, except when the instrument with which the head was scraped was applied. He then, but only once, uttered a groan. As no bene- ficial result appeared, and as the case seemed hopeless, a discharge was obtained, and he was taken to the house of his father. The next day he was seen sitting at the door talking to his parent ; and, the day after, was observed at two miles from home, cutting spars, carrying reeds up a ladder, and assisting his father in thatching a rick.* Victor Foy, alias Victor Travanait, from Luzarche, near Paris, under the pretence of travelling in search of his father, and, by pretending to be deaf and dumb, endeavoured to avoid military * Edinburgh Annual Register, vol. iv. part ii. p. 159. Beck’s Medical Jurisprudence, 7th edit. p. 19.


[24/216 b3303073x_0002_0024.jp2]

204 FEIGNED DISEASES, duty. He was imprisoned in various countries, watched closely, and examined most rigidly, without being detected. So perfectly indeed had he accustomed himself to his part, that when he avowed the fraud, to use his own expression, he had unlearnt how to hear. In Switzerland, he was tempted by a young and beautiful woman, who offered him her hand, but without effect. In the prison at Rochelle, the turnkey was ordered to sleep with him, to watch, and never to quit him. He was repeatedly awakened in a violent manner, but his fright was expressed by a plaintive noise, and in his dreams guttural sounds alone were heard; and the hundred prisoners, who were all ordered to detect him if possible, could discover nothing from which they could imagine deceit. At last the officer charged with the police of the prison of Rochelle became satisfied, after many examinations, that he was really deaf and dumb, and declared this in the public journals, so as to obtain his liberty. Victor unhappily, at _this period, went beyond his capacity. He stated himself in writing to be an éléve of the Abbé Sicard. This ingenious and worthy individual denied the fact without seeing him, and proved it from the writing. “I cannot tell,” said he, in a letter to the counsellor of state, Real, “ whether this person, confined at Rochelle, be really Victor Travanait, or not; but I can say positively, that he was not born deaf and dumb.” The reason which he assigned for this opinion was, that he wrote from sound, while the deaf and dumb write only as they see. In his letters he appeared so ignorant as to divide some words, and annex prepositions to others, as if they were constituent parts. The following extract will serve as a specimen: “ Je jur de vandieux, ma mer et né en Nautriche, quhonduit (pour conduit) essepoise (pour espoir); torre (pour tort) ; ru S. Honoret, jai tas present (pour J étais présent) ; jean porte en core les marque (pour j’en porte encore les marques).” It will be observed, that in this letter, Victor uses q instead of c: and from this Sicard inferred that he had heard, and knew that the sound of these gutturals was similar. He concluded by stating his conviction that Victor was not born deaf, and of course was not dumb. The criminal was now brought to the institution for the deaf and dumb at Paris, and placed before the black board. He was ordered to write answers to questions put to him by Sicard, which he did in so able a manner, and eluded the most embarrassing questions so inge- niously, that nothing but his orthography could yet be adduced against him. Sicard had taught his pupils to articulate sounds, and he had done this by showing them the words, as it were, by the ap- parent effects of touches on a musical instrument, and then pressing their arms more or less strongly. During this operation, he obtains at pleasure the hard or soft consonant, which serves asa sign for the re- quired articulation. Victor, when put to this proof, instead of the syllable pa, pronounced only the vowel a, and never uttered the labial consonant, which all the deaf and dumb easily articulate. He was


[25/216 b3303073x_0002_0025.jp2]

DISQUALIFYING DISEASES. 205 then put to the last test. When asked how he had been instructed, he answered by signs, and promised to explain by them such words as they might write on the black board, but could not do so. He was then placed among those who were really deaf and dumb, but under- stood nothing from them, nor could they comprehend him. Frrighten- ed at this detection, and still more so at the threat he had heard, that he would be confronted with the pastrycook to whom he had been an apprentice, he at last took up a book and read.* Closely connected with the subject of feigned diseases is that of disqualifying diseases, It is chiefly interesting to military and naval surgeons; but cases occasionally occur in civil life in which the medical man is required to state his opinion. He may be directed to ascertain whether an individual is fit to serve on a jury; whether he is able to attend as a witness; whether he is competent to take on him certain offices or duties; or whether he can bear hard labour, or other severe punishment, which he may be sentenced to undergo. The medical man may also be called upon to ascertain the state of health of persons wishing to effect insurances upon their lives, and of children presenting themselves for admission into some of our public schools. The subject of exemption on the ground of dis- qualifications in civil and criminal cases scarcely requires, or admits of, any precise rules. Disqualification for military service is a subject of too great extent to be treated of usefully in this place. There is the less necessity for its introduction here, inasmuch as the military surgeon is required to possess some work on his recruiting duties. The whole subject, indeed, belongs more properly to a work on Hygiéne, than to Forensic Medicine. * Foderé, vol. ii. pp. 478. Beck, p. 26. + Marshall’s Hints on the Examination of Recruits, &amp;c., is the standard work on this subject. ‘To this the reader is referred.


[26/216 b3303073x_0002_0026.jp2]

206 CHAPTER VI. UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. Preliminary Observations —The Mind a Compound of many distinet Faculties. —Choice of Terms.— Unsoundness of Mind.—Non Compos Mentis.— Subdivisions.— Author’s Arrangement.—Spectral Illusions. — Dreaming.— Somnambulism.—Legal Relations of Somnambulism. —Delirium.— Delirium Tremens.— Drunkenness. — Their Legal Re- lations. — A MENTIA.—Idiocy.—Cretenism.—Imbecility.— Their Legal Relations. — DemENTIA. — Varieties. — Legal Relations. —MANIA. —Intellectual (general, and partial).— Moral (general, and partial). —Legal Relations of Mania.—Mania with Lucid Intervals.—Legal Relations.—Of some of the more important Characters of Mental Un- soundness. — Tests.— Plea of Insanity in Criminal Cases.— Feigned Unsoundness of Mind.—Idtocy, Imbecility, Dementia, Mania (general, and partial).— Moral Insanity.—Ooncealed Insanity — Rules for the Eaamination of Persons supposed to be of Unsound Mind. Or the many subjects treated in works on Forensic Medicine, there is none more important, more interesting, or more difficult than this; and within a very recent period, more especially, one ques- tion connected with it has assumed a grave importance. The occasions on which the medical man may be required to give evidence as to the condition of the mind are numerous. A man makes a will; and his relations dispute the validity of it. Was the testator, at the time of making the will, in full possession of his facul- ties ? A criminal makes a confession. The confidence to be placed in his statement may involve the question of the state of his mind at the time of making it. A man squanders his property, or is accused of doing so; and the question arises—is he competent to manage his affairs? An act of great atrocity is committed. Was the man who committed it in a sound state of mind,—in such a state as to make him responsible for his act? A criminal is supposed to feign insanity to escape from the consequences of his crime. Is he really mad ? Such are some of the questions relating to the mind that arise in courts of law, and concerning which the opinion of the medical man is required. Without a written certificate from him, moreover, no man supposed to be mad can be placed under restraint. The importance of the duties which the medical man has to perform is only exceeded by their difficulty, which difficulty is partly inherent in the subject itself, and partly due to the requirements of the law. It may be well to premise, that one source of the difficulties con- nected with this subject may be traced to the prominence and im-


[27/216 b3303073x_0002_0027.jp2]

THE MIND A COMPOUND OF MANY FACULTIES. 207 portance formerly given, in works on the human mind, to one or two of its higher faculties. The reason and the imagination were put so prominently forward, and the emotions and passions were made to play so subordinate a part, that soundness and unsoundness of mind came to be regarded as almost synonymous with a sound or erring reason ; imagination had to bear all the blame of misleading the judg- ment, and delusion became the favourite test of insanity. It is not intended to assert that the metaphysicians were ignorant of the power of the emotions and passions, but merely that they were led to attach a higher importance to those faculties of the mind, which give the widest scope to the speculations of the philosopher. To Gall and Spurzheim, and their followers, is due the great merit of having di- rected attention to those faculties which are the real source of action, —the emotions and passions; and to them must be ascribed the praise of having originated the simplest, and by far the most practical, theory of the human mind. The phrenological question of the mutual rela- tion existing between certain parts of the brain, certain faculties of the mind, and certain developments of the cranium, may be still a matter of doubt, and the practical advantages accruing from a knowledge of those relations a subject of controversy ; but of the soundness of the theory, that the mind is a compound of several faculties, capable of acting either alone or in combination, varying greatly in power in dif- ferent persons, and in the same person at different times, there can be no longer any reasonable doubt. Admit the theory of the separate existence, and possible separate action, of the several faculties of the mind,—the reasoning faculties, the emotions or sentiments, and the pas- sions,—and it is not more difficult to imagine a moral than an intel- lectual insanity; allow that the several faculties, originally of differ- ent power in different persons, may combine in many different ways, and we have the materials of an almost infinite variety of character ; the key to endless diversities of opinion, and the explanation of all that is most obscure in the motives and conduct of mankind. The theory, then, of separate faculties, originally of different power, susceptible of improvement by education and habit, and of dif- ferent degrees of excitement, from causes acting within the body itself or from without, manifesting themselves sometimes alone and some- times in combination with other faculties,—is the theory which is here assumed, as best agreeing with reason and experience. Thus much it was thought necessary to premise. As the members of the medical and of the legal profession are, so to speak, brought more closely into contact in inquiries touching the mind than in other medico-legal investigations, it is of the first importance that the two professions should make use of the same or similar terms, or, at least, that each should understand the terms used by the other. If either profession is bound to prefer the expressions of the other to its own, it is the medical profession, whose duties spring out of the re- quirements of the law. Wherever, then, the law defines with preci-


[28/216 b3303073x_0002_0028.jp2]

208 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. sion the meaning of the terms it uses, those terms will be preferred, and where no fitting word has been provided characteristic of a given state of the unsound mind, that will be employed which is in most common use by the best medical authorities. In searching for a term proper to designate all departures from the more usual state of the mind, we necessarily encounter that of Insanity. This is the word with which the medical man is most familiar, and it is one in general use in society. It would be open to no objec- tion if it could be used in its original signification, as the opposite of that state of mind which we call sane. But the term insanity, like many other words which we are in the constant habit of using, seems to have lost its original meaning, and to be now generally taken in too restricted a sense, implying those deviations from the natural and healthy condition of the mind which consist in excessive and dispro- portioned activity of all or of some only of its faculties, and being rarely if ever applied to those states of mind characterized by deficient energy of action, whether original or acquired. The term Insanity, therefore, does not include all possible deviations from the sound and healthy condition of the mind, and is therefore inapplicable to the present purpose. There are only two terms, indeed, which can be made to answer this purpose—the one is wnsoundness of mind, applied to the condition of the mind itself; the other, non compos mentis, applied to the person whose mind is affected. But even these, though the best, are not free from objections. Thus, the term wnsowndness of mind, though perfectly simple and intelligible, has not been always, or even often, employed by legal authorities in a strict and limited sense. “For instance, it has been used to discriminate one form of itself, Idiocy, from another form of itself, Lunacy, and the reverse ;” and Lord Eldon* has more lately defined it as being “ some such state as was to be contradistinguished from idiocy, and as was to be contradistinguished from lunacy, and yet such as made one a proper object for a commission, in the nature of a commission to inquire of idiocy, or a commission to inquire of lunacy.” “ There is only one statute of importance, namely, that for the safe custody of insane persons charged with offences, where wn- sound mind is used as a term comprehensive enough to include all per- sons styled non compotes mentis. Whereas, in very many statutes it is associated with the words Idiot and Lunatic, as if it were in- tended to denote something different from either.” The term wnsoundness of mind, then, which seemed so simple and intelligible, is nevertheless open to serious objection; but as it is pre- ferable to the term Insanity, or to any other in common use, it has been placed at the head of this chapter. * In the Portsmouth Case. tT 39 and 40 G. ii. c. 94. t A Practical Treatise on the Law of Non Compotes Mentis, or Persons of Unsound Mind. By John Shapland Stock.


[29/216 b3303073x_0002_0029.jp2]

SUBDIVISIONS, 209 The other term, zon compos mentis, applied to persons who are of unsound mind, or memory, as the old statutes have it, is far less objectionable, for it “has not been so irregularly used, but has gene- rally been allowed to retain its natural signification, or at least has not plainly and materially departed from it.”* Where then it is possible to make use of the term non compos mentis, it should be employed in preference to all others; but when we are obliged to speak of the condition of the mind, and not of the person affected, wnsowndness of mind should be used as the least objectionable in a legal sense, and most free from ambiguity. As it will not be possible to avoid the use of the terms madness and insanity, it may be well to state that they are employed to designate mental unsoundness arising from unusual excitement or activity of the faculties. Having thus made choice of a term comprehensive enough to include all deviations from the more usual and sound condition of the mind, we have next to inquire what the law includes under this term— non compos mentis— what forms of unsoundness it recognizes, and how far it may be consistent with our knowledge as medical men to adopt a sub-division in accordance with the legal terms in most common use. The common law of England originally included under this term only two forms of unsoundness, viz., Idiocy and Lunacy, but the highest legal authorities of more modern times have busied themselves in forming more minute sub-divisions. Lord Coke says, “ Non compos mentis is of four sorts. 1. Idiota, which from his nativity by a perpetual infirmity is nox compos mentis. 2. He that by sickness, grief, or other accident wholly loseth his memory and understanding. 3. A lunatic that hath sometime his understanding, and sometime not, aliquando gaudet lucidis intervallis, and therefore he is called non compos mentis, so long as he hath not understanding. Lastly, he that by his own vitious act for a time depriveth himself of his memory and understanding, as he that is drunken.” We have here distinctly recognized only three forms of unsoundness of mind, Idiocy, Dementia, and Lunacy, of which the first two alone are sufficiently well defined and understood to admit of being employed both by lawyers and physicians as part of a classification of the forms of mental unsoundness. The term lunacy is objectionable, inasmuch as it directs attention only to one feature of certain forms of unsound mind,—the occasional enjoyment of lucid intervals. Since Lord Coke’s time, little has been done towards a classification of the several varieties of unsound mind, though Lord Hale has plainly recog- nized the distinction between general or total, and partial, unsound- ness. &lt;A late legal writer, already quoted, suggests a natural and obvious division. Adopting the general term non compos mentis as including all forms of mental unsoundness, he establishes at once a broad distinction “between those persons in whom the malady is the result of an improper inertness of the intellectual powers, whereby the * Stock, op. cit. pe 2i


[30/216 b3303073x_0002_0030.jp2]

UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. 210 ‘spd -q'yw ‘Avy ¢ Aq ‘Aqruesuy Jo souopnadstine yeompoy oy} uo ostyvory, y f ‘UIpPA ‘d'W ‘uosuyor Atuey Aq = ‘stopAOSIC, [eWay JO oNYLPUOWION pue yuoWoSuLAIy 043 UG 4 ‘gd qo ‘do ‘y0039 » Temeg “92, ‘[RIOUaL) *D § TOW *s “LNG WA LIOXS ‘Tew “92 aw oS 72 *  jerrepy aNGNO WOoUd -erauan) “D pc eens fj ‘RIouUeKy) ° ‘a]IUNG °Z : *  sorynoey \ "UTvIq OY} JO sort ee ey} Jo yuowdozoa *SHILTAOVA AO -n{ut Jo ‘syooys peyuoU 4 a -op oy} 0} yuonb @HL dO ALIALLOV ‘elueyY uo yuenbesuog °T. -esqns SULIINII¢Q) da HSINIWIG SSHNGNMOSN{1 a: (0) "Ayooquiy °z, : ‘ * pooy ‘LNUWdOTSARC *( WISTU94 ‘ * enuemy - -plryo ut Ssutsmo PALLOGIAa WOU -e19 Sutpnput) &lt;Adoorpy ‘| -00 JO ‘[eyIUesUO) PAey aq Aq poydope yuoureSuvire oy} 07 oourlquoser sorvou oy} stveq i] 4-"poystjqnd Auer uosuyor “Icy Jo sIsoyy eztid oy} Aq popsoye oourjsisse oy} YIM pur ‘sorjtoyyne yuoreyrp Aq poydope suoryvoytssepo oy} Jo uostavdutos [yorvo v Joe PoJONIJSUOD UIE SVY YOTYA ‘o[qv} SULMOT[OF oY} Ut poyussoid ore sossvTo [edroutId ogey} JO SUOISLAIPANs of J, “WOTPVOYISSVID INO Jo siseq oy} sv poydope Ajarez oq Avur 41 yyy “yUoTUOA -109 OS PUL “HOTPVAIOSYO TILA SOULPIOIV UL Os st “IBYIO sy} UO JUSWE}IOXa eNpUN Wo ssoupuNosuNn pue ‘puLy ouO oy} Uo ‘sorynovZ oy} Jo AyrAtjow IO yuouIdopAap oAoeFop UOT, SUISIIY ssoUPUNOSUN WoIMjoq UWOTULSTP SIT, %  SuruBeUt popjiesun AroA Jo sp1oM Joyjo Auvut puv ‘Aovuny Seruep ‘Aytuesuy “wiped ‘ssoupeyy jo sourvu oy} Aq. powusisop AToyRMOV sso] ST OIG yey} pue “AymMyR_ waA0} oy} Aq pogtosop YSnoud [jam st Yoryar 9181S JVY} WooMJoY SPpIOM J9Y}O UL WOTUT}SIP B f JUSUIO}IOXS PoJOJIpSIUL IO OAISsoOXO TOpuN oiv ‘sSulpooy oy} puL UOHLULSeUT oY} sev ‘o[qeyreuer ATTeNbe stoyjo WoYA UT esoy} pus “Suryuem ATOYM Io yUO}xXo yword vB 0} ore ‘AIOUTOUT puv uordeosed sv ‘suorjoung peyUSUL yULIIOUIT ySOUL BWOS WOT UL OsoY} UOMJoq UoTOUT}sIp v $ suOIssozduIT Os[ey SoAtoD -o1 put oy} Aqoroym ‘Aqratjoe sodoarduit uv Jo 4pnsod oY} SI 41 WOY.A Ut.osoyy puv fsuoTssordumt oAtooor 0} sre} purUT


[31/216 b3303073x_0002_0031.jp2]

SPECTRAL ILLUSIONS. Pale This scheme corresponds closely with the actual state of our know- ledge, and has the advantage of following as nearly as possible the order of nature. It has been preferred to any division founded on the assumption, that unsoundness of mind is always dependent upon inflammation or organic disease of the brain. Such an arrangement, though useful for medical purposes, is altogether inapplicable to ques- tions of a medico-legal nature, which have little to do with pathology, but regard the mind in its outward manifestations, and not in the morbid changes which its organ may be presumed to undergo. As the subject of unsoundness of mind is one of vast extent, and embraces a great amount of details, a methodical arrangement of it is absolutely requisite. It is proposed to treat it under the following heads :—I1st. Of certain unusual conditions of the mind not included under the general term mental unsoundness, and of the phenomena of dreaming. 2. Of certain conditions of the mind allied to mental unsoundness, but produced by temporary causes, viz. delirium, de- lirium tremens, and drunkenness. 3. Of the several forms of un- sound mind, treated in the order in which they stand in the fore- going table. 4. Of some of the more important characters of the unsound mind, and of the medical and legal tests of that unsoundness, 5. Of feigned unsoundness of mind. And, lastly, Rules for the exa- mination of persons supposed to be of unsound mind, l. OF CERTAIN UNUSUAL CONDITIONS OF THE MIND NOT INCLUDED UNDER THE GENERAL TERM MENTAL UNSOUNDNESS, AND OF THE PHENOMENA OF DREAMING. There is more than one reason why the subjects included under this head should form a part of a treatise on unsoundness of mind. Spectral illusions, dreaming, and somnambulism, have a close analogy, to mental unsoundness ; dreaming nearly resembles one of its forms ; spectral illusions exist in a great proportion of those cases in which there is undue activity of the faculties; and somnambulism deserves notice, inasmuch as the acts of the somnambulist are such as to ori- ginate questions of a medico-legal nature. These subjects will be treated as briefly as possible. Spectral illusions.—Some individuals have possessed the power of recalling at will impressions made on the senses, so as to place the objects before them afresh ; others have enjoyed a still more envi- able power of converting thoughts into sensations, if such an expres- sion may be allowed ; and others again, in moments of intense excite- ment, or under the influence of slight derangements of their health, have peoned to see or hear things which had no existence but in their own imaginations. A singular example of this visual deception is related by Sir David Brewster.* It occurred in the case of Mrs. A. a delicate valetudinarian. The sense of hearing was first affected, her * Letters on Natural Magic,


[32/216 b3303073x_0002_0032.jp2]

O12 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. husband seeming to speak to her though he was not near her, and this occurred several times in the course of her malady. The sense of sight next became the subject of deception. At one time she saw the spectre of her husband, at another that of a near relation, enveloped in grave-clothes, at a third, that of a deceased friend. A spectral cat sometimes introduced a little variety into her visions. But in all these cases, whether the ear or the eye was the subject of the illusion, the mind was fully aware of the real seat of the deception. The same consciousness of the unreality of the impressions on the senses occurred in the case of Nicolai, the bookseller of Berlin, and in some cases related by Sir Walter Scott.* Spectral illusions, as has been stated, are of common occurrence in some forms of mental unsoundness. It is important to bear this fact in mind as it serves to explain the obstinate belief by which the mind, in such cases, is possessed. Thus the author of a curious and interesting autobiography, of which I propose to make frequent use, partly on account of the internal evidence of truth which it bears, and partly from the strong confirmation given to all its statements by one who had been similarly afflicted, after alluding to one of his many spectral illusions, says, “I imagined I was really present to them ; and that my not acknowledging it was a delusion, an obstinate resist- ance of the divine will on my part. That of the two, the appearance of the bed, walls, and furniture, was false, mot my preternatural im- pressions.” + Spectral illusions then are common to men of sound and of unsound mind, the difference being, that the former do not believe in their reality, the latter do. The sane man corrects these false impres- sions by the use of the other senses, or by some effort of comparison, while the man of unsound mind neglects these simple means of un- deceiving himself, or cannot use them ; or if he is led to entertain any doubt, he dispels it by the help of his delusion, Thus, the author of the auto-biography, whose unsoundness of mind took a strong re- ligious turn, thought it zmpious to doubt. Dreaming.—The phenomena of dreaming have so striking an ana- logy to those of some forms of unsound mind, that a brief allusion to them may be useful in this place. In dreams, objects of sense have all the vivid impress of reality, and the thoughts which pass through the mind produce the same impres- sion, as in our waking state; the belief in their reality not being cor- rected by a comparison with the things of the external world. The images or ideas which arise in the mind, also follow each other accord- ing to associations over which we haye no controul. We cannot, as in the waking state, vary the series, or stop it at our will. * Demonology and Witchcraft. + A Narrative of the treatment experienced by a Gentleman, during a state of Mental Derangement; designed to explain the Causes and the Nature of Insanity, p. 63.


[33/216 b3303073x_0002_0033.jp2]

PHENOMENA OF DREAMING. 2h Dr. Abercrombie has classified the phenomena of dreaming as fol- lows :—“ 1. Recent events, and recent mental emotions, mingled up into one continuous series, with each other, or with old events,—by means of some feeling which had been in a greater or less degree allied to each of them, though, in other respects, they were entirely unconnected. We hear, perhaps, of a distressing accident; we have received some unpleasant news of an absent friend; and we have been concerned in some business which gave rise to anxiety : a dream takes place in which all these are combined together ; we are ourselves con- nected with the accident; the absent friend is in our company; and the person with whom the business is transacted also appears on the scene. The only bond of union among these occurrences was, that each of them gave rise to a similar kind of emotion ; and the train was probably excited by some bodily feeling of uneasiness,—perhaps an oppression at the stomach—at the time when the dream occurred. “2. Trains of images brought up by associations with bodily sensa- tions.” Examples of this kind are of frequent occurrence. Thus, “ Dr. Reid relates of himself, that the dressing applied after a blister on his head, having become ruffled so as to produce considerable un- easiness, he dreamt of falling into the hands of savages, and being scalped by them.” Another curious fact has been observed with regard to dreams excited by bodily sensations, and especially by loud noises, “* viz. that the same sound awakes the person, and produces a dream which appears to him to occupy a considerable time.” Thus, ‘a gentleman dreamed that he had enlisted as a soldier, joined his regiment, deserted, was apprehended, carried back, tried, condemned to be shot, and at last led out for execution. After all the usual preparations, a gun was fired; he awoke with the report, and found that a noise in an adjoming room had both produced the dream and awakened him.” “ 3. Dreams consisting of the revival of old associations respecting things which had entirely passed out of the mind, and which seemed to have been forgotten.” Itis this revival of old associations which has led to the belief that dreams have providentially pointed out some important fact, which had been forgotten in the waking state. “ 4, The fourth class of dreams consists of an embodyment of some strong propensity of character, or some strong mental emotion, and in this case, the dream has been more than once, by some extraordinary coincidence, fulfilled.’’* The strong analogy existing between the phenomena of dreaming, and those of certain forms of unsound mind, is shown in almost every page of the autobiography already quoted. Thus the cold air blowing upon him, as he is attempting to suffocate himself, in obedience to the spirits which speak within him, becomes the breath of the spirits of his sisters * Inquiries concerning the Intellectual Powers, and the Investigation of Truth. By John Abercrombie, M.D., 9th edit., p. 260, et seq. The reader is referred to this work for many instructive anecdotes referring to this subject.


[34/216 b3303073x_0002_0034.jp2]

214 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. breathing on him to cool him, and encouraging him to go through with his task. The familiar sensation of water trickling down the back is at once converted into the crystal tears of his father, whose venerable countenance he sees bending over him. At the commencement of his illness his head was shaved, and he says, “ My chief grief at that time was, that I had received the tonsure of the Roman Catholic priesthood, a mark of the beast.” The jets of gas from the fireplace became the utterance of his father’s spirit, which was continually within hin, at- tempting to save him, and continually obliged to return to be purified in hell-fire, in consequence of the contamination it received from his foul thoughts. The lowing of the cattle conveyed to him articulate sounds and sentences, and the grating of the chair against the wall spoke to him in his father’s voice.* It is impossible not to recognize the marked analogy between this form of unsoundness and that of dreams belonging to the second class. It would not be difficult to ad- duce examples of the other subdivisions from many parts of this curious autobiography-— The remarkable analogy between dreaming and insanity is well illustrated by the case of a maniac, mentioned by Dr. Gregory. He had been for some time under his care, and entirely recovered. Fora week after his recovery, he was harassed during his dreams, by the same rapid and tumultuous thoughts ; and the same violent passions, by which he had been agitated during his insanity. The difference between dreaming and insanity is, that in the one, the senses are closed to outward objects; in the other, the evidence of sense is disregarded, or the senses merely serve to suggest trains of wild and fanciful association. In dreaming, as soon as the person is roused from sleep, and the external world is again brought before him, all his delusions vanish. But the madman is in a waking dream, from which he is not to be roused, and the external world is to him as if it existed not; or, if it mix itself up with his morbid fancies, it is to become strangely perverted and misinterpreted by the help of his pre- vailing delusion. The dreams of the madman take their shape from his delusion, and he believes his dreams as he believes the delusion by which they are both produced and interpreted. If a sane man were to dream the same dreams night after night, it is not improbable, as is observed by Paschal, that he would believe them as firmly as the madman does his waking dreams. * Op. cit., p. 60, et seq. + Abercrombie on the Intellectual Powers, p. 294. t The case of M‘Naughton may perhaps be cited as bearing a close resem- blance to the first class of dreams. The refusal of his father to take him into partnership originated in his mind a sense of hardship and injury; the Roman Catholics, the Police, and the Tories, being successively the theme of newspaper abuse, and being also represented as guilty of acts of injustice, impressed his mind with the same feeling. Hence the long dream of years, in which the sense of public injury was transferred to himself, till he became the fancied object of political persecution.


[35/216 b3303073x_0002_0035.jp2]

SOMNAMBULISM. 215 A question of criminal responsibility arises in those rare cases in which a man suddenly aroused from sleep has killed another. A case is given on the authority of Dr. Pagan, of one Bernard Schedmaizig, who suddenly awaking at midnight thought he saw a frightful phan- tom. He twice called out “ Who is that ?” but receiving no answer, and imagining that the phantom was advancing upon him, and having altogether lost his self-possession, he raised a hatchet which was be- side him and attacked the spectre. It was found that he had murder- ed his wife.* A case is also related of two individuals, who finding themselves out over night in a place infested with robbers, engaged that one should watch while the other slept ; but the former falling asleep, and dreaming of being pursued, shot his friend through the heart. A pedlar, who was rudely aroused from sleep by a passer-by, ran him through the body with the sword of a sword stick. He was found guilty.t In all such cases the confused state of the mind on being suddenly aroused from sleep ought certainly to be considered as a mitigating circumstance. Somnambulism.—This is a form of dreaming in which the senses and voluntary muscles participate; the one exercised with extraordi- nary acuteness on the subject matter of the dream, the other obeying the mandates of the sleeper’s will with unwonted precision. The somnambulist’s mind during the dream is concentrated upon one ob- ject : hence his reason or fancy will accomplish that to which it was unequal during his waking hours. It is this complete attention to one object, too, which probably accounts for that extraordinary acute- ness of the senses, and precision of movement just mentioned. Some- times the sleep-walker goes, with all the precision of his waking hours, through some routine duty ; at others, he does that to which he is quite unaccustomed, and accomplishes that which awake he would not dare to undertake. Thus, he will walk on the edge of a preci- pice, swim a rapid stream, or ride at full gallop, in safety, because fear, being asleep, does not check or paralyze those faculties of the mind which are awake. Objects of sense presented to the sleep-walker, either produce no effect, or they are mixed up indistinctly with the dream which he is acting. In some cases, so complete is the mind’s abstraction, that the loudest noises are unheeded ; in others, those things only are attended to which harmonize with the existing train of thought. The somnam- bulist is either unconscious of what has occurred, or he remembers it asadream. In some cases, that which has transpired in one fit of sleep-walking is distinctly remembered in subsequent ones, but quite forgotten in the intervals. As there is a strong analogy between dreaming and insanity, so is * This case is quoted by Mr. Forbes Winslow in his “‘ Plea of Insanity in Criminal Cases,’ p. 72. + Ray, op. cit. p. 268. {This case is also quoted by Mr. Winslow, from the British and Foreign Medical Review.


[36/216 b3303073x_0002_0036.jp2]

216 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. there a still more close correspondence between the phenomena of somnambulism and insanity. The chief difference between them is, that the former occurs only during sleep, and ceases as soon as the patient is roused from it,—the latter is permanent, but both, when remembered, appear as confused dreams, ‘The analogy, indeed, may be carried much further; for in certain forms of both these affections there is a remarkable increase of talent; in both there may be a com- plete change of character; and it would not be incorrect to state, that there is an intellectual and moral somnambulism, as there is an intel- lectual and moral insanity. The following cases are both interesting and instructive :—A Car- thusian monk who, while awake, was remarkable for his simplicity, candour, and probity, walked almost every night in his sleep, and was a thief, a robber, and a plunderer of the dead. A pious clergy- man, in his fits of somnambulism, would steal and secrete what- ever he could lay his hands upon, and on one occasion he even plundered his own church. Ray, in addition to the foregoing cases, quotes one which occurred a few years since in the state of Maine in America, in which there was a strong disposition to commit sui- cide. ‘The paroxysms appeared every night, and watchers were required, as if the somnambulist had been labouring under an acute disease. He always attempted to escape from his keepers; and having succeeded one night, an outcry was heard from a neighbouring pasture, and he was found suspended by a rope from the limb ofa high tree. Fortunately, he had attached the rope to his feet instead of his neck, and consequently was but little injured.”* The fol- lowing curious case is quoted by Georget from an anonymous work, It occurred in the person of a monk, who late one evening entered the room of the prior of the convent, his eyes open, but fixed, his features contracted into a frown, and with a knife in his hand. He walked straight up to the bed, as if to ascertain if the prior were there, and then gave three stabs, which penetrated the bed-clothes and a mat, which served the purpose of a mattress. He then returned, his fea- tures relaxed, and an air of satisfaction on his countenance. The next day, the prior asked him what he had dreamed about the preceding night. The monk confessed, that having dreamed that his mother had been murdered by the prior, and that her spirit had appeared to him and cried for vengeance, he was transported with fury at the sight, and ran directly to stab her assassin. Shortly after he awoke, covered with perspiration, and rejoiced to find that it was only a dream.’”| Legal Relations of Somnambulism.—An unnecessary question has been raised as to the responsibility of the somnambulist for acts com- mitted during the paroxysm, and it has been attempted to be shown that, as that which is done during the fit is often only the accomplish- * A Treatise on the Medical Jurisprudence of Insanity. By J. Ray, M D. + Georget, des Maladies Mentales, p. 127.


[37/216 b3303073x_0002_0037.jp2]

DELIRIUM. vAligé ment of a project formed whilst the party was awake, he ought to be held responsible. If this assumption were true, it would scarcely make the man responsible, unless it could be shown, that, as a som- nambulist, he was voluntarily accomplishing that which he had pre- a sleep-walker at will, which isan absurd supposition. If the question of responsibility should arise, it would be necessary to ascertain that the sleep-walking was real and not feigned, and it ought to be shown that, at some previous time, the person in question had been a somnambulist. Ecstasis, or cataleptic somnambulism, which is nearly allied to hysteria, and almost invariably occurs in females, may be noticed in this place. For some interesting cases of it, the reader is referred to Dr. Abercrombie’s work.* 2. OF CERTAIN CONDITIONS OF THE MIND, ALLIED TO MENTAL UN- SOUNDNESS, BUT PRODUCED BY TEMPORARY CAUSES, VIZ. DELIRIUM, DELIRIUM TREMENS, AND DRUNKENNESS. Delirium.—This state of mind is present in almost all diseases which have attained a certain degree of severity, especially in febrile affections, and those accompanied by high febrile action. Thus, it is a common consequence of severe accidents, of surgical operations, and of inflammatory affections of the internal viscera. More rarely it ac- companies the last stage of chronic diseases, and ushers in the fatal termination. Sometimes it occurs suddenly, but more frequently it comes on by degrees, being preceded by pain and throbbing in the head, heat of the scalp, and flushing of the cheeks. It first shows itself by a propensity to talk during sleep, and, on awaking, the patient evinces a momentary forgetfulness of his situation and of things about him. When fully aroused, however, he is collected, and the mind remains comparatively clear and tranquil, till the next slumber. By degrees the disorder of the mind increases, the intervals of tran- quillity become of shorter duration, till at length the delirium becomes constant. The patient lies on his back, dull and listless, his eyes half open, muttering to himself, unconscious of persons or things around him, and when aroused scarcely recognising them. The scenes and events of the past seem to pass before his mind in wild and disorderly array, and form the subject of his incoherent discourse. As the disorder increases and the strength fails, the voice becomes more indistinct, the fingers are constantly picking at the bed-clothes, the evacuations are passed insensibly, and the patient can no longer be aroused to any effort of attention. If delirium occurs in an earlier stage of the disease, or when the patient is stronger, these symptoms are somewhat modified. The eyes are bloodshot, intently fixed, as if on some object really present, the skin hot and dry. The patient talks loudly, breaks out into cries * On the Intellectual Powers, pp. 298—312. Q


[38/216 b3303073x_0002_0038.jp2]

218 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. and vociferations, tosses restlessly about in bed, and makes repeated attempts to get up. Sometimes, under the influence of the delirium, the memory of things long past becomes wonderfully active, and languages which were quite forgotten are recollected and spoken with perfect fluency. Many cases of this kind are on record. Dr. Rush, among many other similar instances, states, that the old Swedes of Philadelphia, when on their death-beds, would always pray in their native tongue, though they had not spoken it for fifty or sixty years, and had probably forgotten it before they were sick.* In fatal cases, delirium usually passes into coma, but occasionally it disappears some hours or days before death, and leaves the patient in full possession of his faculties. Delirium bears a close resemblance to certain forms of unsound mind, especially to that which goes by the name of incoherence. The distinction between the two is not always easily made, without some inquiry into the history of the case. Delirium is a symptom of some bodily disease, manifesting itself by well marked characters, while the various forms of unsound mind are rarely accompanied by such a de- gree of bodily disorder as would seriously affect the mind. There can be no difficulty then in distinguishing febrile delirium from that unsoundness of mind which is an original disorder, as the very aspect of the patient, the very first glance at the countenance, would at once reveal the real state of the case. Legal Relations of Delirium.—Questions frequently arise in courts of law as to the validity of wills made by patients labouring under diseases attended with delirium. In such cases the law has regard more to the nature of the act, than to the proved existence of a lucid interval. “If the testamentary act be agreeable to instruc- tions or declarations previously expressed, when unquestionably sound in mind; if it be consonant to the general tenor of his affec- tions; if it be consistent and coherent, one part with another; and if it have been obtained by the exercise of no improper influence; it will be established, even though the medical evidence may throw strong doubts on the capacity of the testator. On the contrary, when these conditions are absent, or are replaced by others of an opposite description, it will as generally be annulled, however plain and positive may be the evidence in favour of the testator’s capacity.” A less stringent proof of a lucid interval is required in these cases than in cases of insanity with lucid intervals, on the principle that “the apparently rational intervals of persons merely delirious,” in contradistinction to the apparently lucid intervals of the insane, “ are really such.” { Civil acts, committed during an access of delirium, would be necessarily void, and criminal acts would entail no responsibility. * On Diseases of the Mind, p. 282. y+ Ray’s Medical Jurisprudence of Insanity, p. 207. { Sir John Nicholl’s Judgment in Brogden v. Brown. 2. Addam’s Re- ports, 441.


[39/216 b3303073x_0002_0039.jp2]

LEGAL RELATIONS OF DELIRIUM TREMENS. 219 Delirium Tremens.—The delirium of drunkards is distinguished from febrile delirium on the one hand, and from mania on the other—from febrile delirium by the absence of fever, or at least of such a degree of febrile action as would account for the presence of delirium, and from mania, by the previous history, as well as by the peculiar symptoms accompanying the mental disorder. The tremor, from which this form of delirium is named, is rarely altogether absent, and where pre- sent is extremely characteristic. The patient is restless, anxious, sleepless, suspicious, timid, and cunning. He thinks that he is ina strange place, and under a controul from which he is constantly en- deavouring to escape. He sees himself surrounded by hideous and loathsome objects,—toads, serpents, and scorpions,—and he hears strange sounds and threatening voices. His countenance is expres- sive of extreme anxiety, fear, and suspicion; he endeavours to escape from his imaginary tormentors, and if not properly watched is apt to commit suicide, or to destroy those who are about him, whom he mis- takes for his enemies. The countenance, in the midst of all this excite- ment, is generally pale, except in those cases where the disease follows, as it sometimes does, a single debauch, instead of being the consequence, as it commonly is, of a short suspension of habits of intoxication. The analogy which delirium tremens bears to dreaming has often been pointed out. In the milder forms of the affection, the patient goes about as usual, answers questions collectedly, and converses ra- tionally ; but when left to himself, he is as one in a walking dream, speaking of things calculated strongly to excite the feelings and pas- sions with a manner perfectly free from excitement.* This form of delirium tremens differs from somnambulism, inasmuch as the latter is an actual dream, the former a dreamy state in one awake. In cases of delirium tremens accompanied by strong excitement, there is sometimes the closest resemblance to moral insanity, the patient being impelled to acts of violence against himself and others by the most unfounded delusions. Legal Relations of Delirium Tremens.—As delirium tremens is a form of temporary insanity produced by a peculiar exciting cause, its legal relations must be those of insanity, unless the nature of the ex- citing cause constitutes it an exception to the general rule. This it does not appear to do; for, though drunkenness has little effect on civil or criminal acts, delirium tremens is allowed to have the same effect as insanity itself. Thus, in the American cases of Alexander Drew and Theodore Wilson, tried for murder, an acquittal took place on the ground of insanity, and in that of John Birdsell, tried for the same crime, the punishment of death was, on the ground of insanity, com- muted for that of imprisonment.+ * In the King’s College Hospital Report for 1842, published in the Medical Gazette, March 10, 1843, a curious instance of this kind is related. + See the cases at length in Ray’s Medical Jurisprudence of Insanity, p. 292, and seq.


[40/216 b3303073x_0002_0040.jp2]

220 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND, Drunkenness—It is unnecessary to describe the effects produced by intoxicating liquors. We are all familiar with drunkenness as it walks the streets—the boisterous mirth and noisy violence of its first stage, the beastly forgetfulness of its last. The hold which intem- perance takes upon the mind, and the tyranny of the habit, once completely formed, is known in its full extent only by those who have had personal experience of it. An insatiable craving after ardent spirits also forms in some cases a marked feature of insanity, and in persons otherwise sane it has been often known to assume an inter- mittent character. Legal Relations of Drunkenness—Drunkenness alone is not suffi- cient to invalidate a deed or agreement, except when carried to such an excess as to deprive the party of all consciousness of what he is doing. The acts of the drunkard are also held to be valid, unless it can be shown that the drunkenness was procured by another with a view of obtaining some unfair advantage. The law, with regard to crimes committed under the influence of intoxicating liquors, is thus laid down by Coke upon Littleton :—* A drunkard, who is voluntarius demon, hath no privilege thereby; whatever ill or hurt he doeth, his drunkenness doth aggravate it.” It is more correct to state that drunkenness has no legal effect whatever, on any offence to which it leads. It neither increases nor mitigates the penalties which attach to it.* This observation applies only to drunkenness in its usual ac- ceptation, and not to delirium tremens. 3. OF THE SEVERAL FORMS OF UNSOUND MIND. On referring to the table (p. 210), it will be seen that the several forms of unsound mind resolve themselves into three principal ones: Amentia, Dementia, and Mania. AMENTIA. Idiocy.—In this, as in other forms of unsound mind, the law has not been wanting in definitions. An idiot is defined as “ of non-sane memory, a nativitate,” as one “who from his nativity, by a per- petual infirmity, is non compos mentis,” as “one that has no under- standing from his nativity,” or more loosely, and most incorrectly, thus: “‘ He that shall be said to be a sot and idiot from his birth is such a person who cannot count or number twenty, and tell who was his father or mother, nor how old he is, so that it may appear that he hath no understanding of reason what shall be for his profit or what for his loss.” Again, “if he be able to beget either son or daughter, he is no fool natural.”*+ In the old writs the term is employed in a much more extended sense, for they constantly direct an inquiry “ num idiota a nativitate aut a quo tempore,” and one of them sanctions * Ray, Medical Jurisprudence of Insanity, p. 292. + Stock, op. cit. p. 4.


[41/216 b3303073x_0002_0041.jp2]

IDIOCY. OA a still looser acceptation of the term, for it inquires whether the party be an idiot, and if so, whether from birth or from some other time, and if from some other time, from what time, and in what way, and from what cause, and whether he had lucid intervals. More ~recently, however, the meaning attached to the term by Lord Coke has been recognised by high legal authority, and may be fairly taken as the modern sense. There can be no objection on the part of the medical man to the use of the word idiot in the sense which the law attaches to it, provided it be understood that idiocy admits of degrees, and like other forms of unsound mind does not allow of strict definition. The term ¢dzot then, will be used in this work in the sense of one unsound from birth, the term ambecility being used to designate mental unsoundness, consisting also in defective development, but that defect originating after birth ; and, on that very account, being in most cases less complete. Idiots are deformed in body as well as unsound in mind. Their heads are generally very small, but occasionally above the average size, depressed in the forehead, flattened at the sides, and gro- tesquely shaped ; the eyes are small and deeply set and often squint; the mouth large and gaping, the lips thick, and the other features imperfect ; the complexion pale and unhealthy, the chest narrow and contracted, the limbs ill-formed, the gait awkward and unsteady. The senses are dull, or altogether wanting. Their sight is imperfect ; they are deaf or hard of hearing: dumb, and expressing their wants only by inarticulate sounds; the senses of smell and taste being without power of discrimination, they have no choice of food. Sensation is not followed by perception ; their attention cannot be roused, and they are, therefore, incapable of instruction ; they show scarcely a trace of memory, judgment, or imagination, and have even less instinct than the brutes. Were it not for the constant care of parents or friends they must perish. The following case will form a good illustration of complete idiocy : “In 1812 we had at the Salpétriére, a female idiot who was found lying by the side of the body of her mother, who appeared to have been dead three days. This idiot, who was sent to the hospital by order of the police, was twenty-seven years of age, very thin, pale, rickety, blind, deaf, and dumb, and uttered from time to time a shrill, inarticulate, stifled cry. Her limbs were atrophied, and the legs were bent under the thighs, so that she could not walk. It was necessary to introduce liquid aliments into the mouth even down to the cesopha- gus; she could neither masticate nor swallow. She was nourished with soup and wine, and died at the end of a few days.”* Some idiots display slight glimpses of intelligence. Their at- tention can be roused by strong impressions on the senses. They * Esquirol des Maladies Mentales—de 1’ Idiotie, vol. ii, p. 96.


[42/216 b3303073x_0002_0042.jp2]

222 '  UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. look at certain objects, go for their food and take it, recognise those who take care of them, indicate the objects of their desires by cries and gestures, manifest pleasure and pain, but are helpless, require to be dressed and undressed, put to bed, and placed where they are to remain. Others can move from place to place, go through a routine of move- ments, laugh mechanically, utter inarticulate sounds, as if for amuse- ment, hum some simple airs, become attached to particular places and persons. They are, however, deficient in powers of thought and at- tention, and when left to themselves, are careless, slothful, filthy, lazy, and timid. At the period of puberty, they display the sexual passion by offensive gestures and habits, are subject to attacks of nympho- Mania or satyriasis, and to fits of violence; or they grow dejected, and sink under a gradual decay of health.* There is a remarkable form of idiocy called Cretinism, endemic in the Vallais, among the Alps, and in some other mountainous countries. The victims of this singular affection are usually divided into three classes,—cretins, semi-cretins, and cretins of the third degree. The first of these classes, the cretins, answer in every point to the description of complete idiocy just given, with the addition of the peculiar deformity of the throat, to which they are subject. Life, with them, is altogether automatic; they are unable to speak, their senses are dull, if not altogether wanting, and nothing but the most urgent calls of nature rouses their attention. Their time is spent in basking in the sun, or sitting by the fire, without any trace of intelli- gence. The next class, or semi-cretins, show a higher degree of in- telligence. They may be taught to read as parrots can, without understanding the meaning of what they read; they have no idea of numbers; they note what passes around them, and make use of lan- guage to express their wants. They remember common events, understand what is said to them, speak intelligibly on common sub- jects, and can be taught to repeat prayers, though without attaching any definite meaning to the words they use. The cretins of the third degree show glimpses of a higher nature, are capable of attaining a certain degree of proficiency in mechanical employments, in drawing, painting, mechanical contrivances, and music. Their knowledge, how- ever, is merely the effect of imitation and habit. It is said that none of them can be taught arithmetic, and there is no doubt that it isa very rare acquirement. They are said to be acutely alive to their own interest, extremely litigious, unable to manage themselves or their affairs, but obstinate and unwilling to be advised. In the semi-cretins and cretins of the third degree, the mental de- ficiency is not always congenital, but supervenes in early childhood. If removed from the place of their birth and placed under judicious superintendance early in life, they are capable of considerable improve- * See Pritchard on the ‘‘ Different Forms of Insanity, in relation to Juris- prudence,’’ pp. 208, 209. ft Abercrombie on the Intellectual Powers, p. 352.


[43/216 b3303073x_0002_0043.jp2]

IMBECILITY. 293 ment, both of mind and body, and may be made useful members of society. Persons belonging to these two classes are not properly in- cluded under the head of idiots, but must be classed with imbeciles. The Legal Relations of Idiocy, in the restricted sense here assigned to the term, are very obvious. The persons now described labour under complete civil disability, and are irresponsible. Imbecility. This term is here used to designate unsoundness of mind occurring in early childhood, as contradistinguished from that which is congenital. This distinction, though not practically impor- tant, is useful, inasmuch as it is in accordance with the legal definition of idiocy already laid down; and it has the advantage of separating the idiot who has no use of speech, in consequence of his faculties at birth having been so defective as to prevent him from being taught even to this limited extent, from others who, having been endowed from birth with some degree of intellect, have evinced it by acquiring the use of speech. This distinction has the additional advantage of having been adopted by a distinguished writer on Mental Unsound- ness, M. Georget, according to whom, the imbecile are persons who have some use, however limited, of speech, and who therewith display some indications of mind, of intellectual faculties, and of feelings or affections. Another advantage arising from the distinction here in- sisted on is, that it tends to simplify the subject of unsoundness from defective development of the faculties; for the idiot in this limited sense has obviously no capacity of action, no legal ability, and no re- sponsibility for crime, so that it is with regard to the imbecile alone that medico-legal questions can arise. Imbecility is defined by Dr. Ray as “an abnormal deficiency either in those faculties that acquaint us with the qualities and ordinary re- lations of things, or in those which furnish us with the moral motives that regulate our relations and conduct towards our fellow-men; and frequently attended with excessive activity of the animal propensi- ties.”* Imbeciles are capable of being educated, of forming and ex- pressing a few simple ideas, of retaining to a certain extent that which they learn, of making some progress in reading, writing, arithmetic, music, and the mechanical arts, and even of attaining a certain degree of proficiency in some one branch of knowledge. But they cannot attain that degree of knowledge or practical skill which is common among people of their own rank and opportunities. Hence it happens that their education is neglected, and that they are employed in the coarsest and rudest labours. In moral and intellectual character they differ as widely as men of sound mind. Some are fickle and change- able, others persevering in the pursuit of some favourite object; while the attention of the one class cannot be arrested for a moment, that of the other can scarcely be diverted from the subject of their thoughts. Some engage in business, and can manage themselves and property, * Ray’s Treatise on the Medical Jurisprudence of Insanity.


[44/216 b3303073x_0002_0044.jp2]

294 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. though obliged to resort to others for advice and assistance; they can give rational answers to questions relating to their ordinary pursuits, but are incapable of argument or sustained conversation. They are thoughtless, improvident, timid, and wayward; incapable of strong attachment, and labour under a constant uneasiness and restlessness of disposition. Sometimes they are physically as well as intellectually and morally imperfect, with a tendency, though in a less degree, to the malformation and diseases of the idiot. The following observations of Georget will serve to complete this description: “In hospitals for the insane there is always a certain number of imbeciles, who do the coarser work of the house, or serve as domestics and assistants to the regular officers. They become sufficiently intelligent at last to perform their duties well, to sweep the courts, carry burdens, move machines, execute simple commissions, know the use of money, and procure various enjoyments. But they have no idea, or a very imperfect one, of society, laws, morality, courts and trials; and though they may have the idea of property, they have no conception of the consequences of theft. They may have been taught to refrain from injuring others, but they are igno- rant of what would be done to them if guilty of incendiarism or murder. Indeed, it is well known how common theft is among imbeciles and idiots, and for a very obvious reason. Some of them have no conception of property, nor of the distinction of mewm and twum ; their conduct is actuated solely by the fear of punishment, when capable of experiencing this sentiment, and by their own desires. Others have some notions of property, but neither a sense of morality, nora fear of punishment furnishes motives sufficiently power- ful to prevent them from stealing. The sentiment of cunning, too, may be very much developed, while the other faculties are more or less deficient. Among the lower orders of society are many imbeciles a little more intelligent than these, and not considered as utterly devoid of understanding, who, nevertheless, have but vague and im- perfect notions of social duties and of justice. They engage in occu- pations that require no great extent of intellect, and even in the simplest of the mechanic arts. If they do not pass among their acquaintances for imbeciles, they are at least regarded as singular beings, with feeble understandings, and are teased and tormented in innumerable ways.. Many of them, for want of some powerfully restraining motive, indulge in drinking, and become lazy, drunken, and dissipated, and finally fall into the hands of justice in greater numbers than is generally suspected. They steal adroitly, and hence are considered as very intelligent ; they recommence their offences the moment they are released from confinement, and thus are believed to be obstinately perverse ; they are violent and passionate, and the slightest motive is sufficient to plunge them into deeds of incendiarism and mur- der. Those who have strong sexual propensities, soon become guilty of council


[45/216 b3303073x_0002_0045.jp2]

MORAL IMBECILITY. 225 outrages on female chastity.”* The same author, elsewhere, observes, “these beings of limited capacity furnish to the courts of justice, to prisons and scaffolds, more subjects than it is generally supposed.” Such is a faithful description of imbecility, manifesting itself, as it usually does, jointly in the intellect, the feelings, and the pro- pensities. But there is no doubt that imbecility is sometimes par- tial; that there is, in fact, an intellectual and a moral imbecility ; —an inability to acquire and apply knowledge, occurring in per- sons who have a due sense of right, act with integrity, and perform every social duty, on the one hand; and, on the other hand, an unusual power of acquiring knowledge, with judgment, fancy, and refined taste, but combined with a feebleness of purpose, an inaptitude for business, a disregard of duty, a want of honesty, and oftentimes a strength of passion, which, were it not for the intellect they display, would class them at once with the imbecile. They are known in society as weak, soft, easy, good-natured, well-meaning, good sort of people, and if possessed of brilliant talents, as having every sense but common sense. They meet with much sympathy, and sometimes, perhaps, with more blame than they deserve. These are those who know not how to say zo either to themselves or others; who are too easy to be just, too thoughtless to be honest. They have an instinc- tive horror of business, an aversion to their regular occupations, and a distaste for everything that wears the shape of a duty. If their profession is law they will give all their time to divinity, if divinity to physic. They are utterly ignorant of the value of money, and the iast use they make of it is to pay their debts. Each man among them has his own favourite form of extravagance, and his own peculiar mode of ruining himself. One calls an architect to his assistance ; another an upholsterer ; a third collects tseful things which he never uses, or displays a curious taste in worthless trifles. They are al- ways forming acquaintances with unworthy persons, for rogues find it worth their while to know and to flatter them. With all their easi- ness of disposition they have much warmth of temper, and strength of passion, but this is known only to those from whom it ought to be concealed. They are bad husbands, children, and fathers, because in these relations of life they have duties to perform. Throughout life they are weak, wavering, fickle, and self-willed, as children; the source of constant anxiety and misery to their families, the prey of designing knaves, the expected inmates of gaols, workhouses, and lunatic asylums. The persons subject to this form of moral imbecility remain at large, because the intellect being unaffected, they have no striking delusions, and no one could undertake to say that they have not the power, if they would exercise the will, to make themselves, at any moment, useful members of society. As weakness of intellect * Discussion Médico-Légale sur la Folie, p. 140, Ray, p. 59.


[46/216 b3303073x_0002_0046.jp2]

226 - UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. is a necessary part of the legal notion of imbecility, the attempt to prove such persons imbecile in a court of law would necessarily fail. An absence of moral feeling and corresponding want of self-controul is the essence of their mental malady. The imbecile are sometimes as much under the dominion of some childish fancy as the maniac is of his delusion. A commission of lunacy was lately granted in the case of William Obius Tillard, a gentleman aged 20, who was the slave of a childish fancy for windmills, with an aversion equally strong to watermills. Having been placed under con- troul in a place where there were no windmills, he cut the calves of a child’s legs through to the bone, and stated that he should have taken away its life, in order that he might be tried for his act, and removed from a place where there were no windmills. He had always been violent when thwarted in his fancy, had threatened his keeper and members of his family, and had more than once made preparations for committing murder. Legal Relations of Imbecility.— In respect to this form of mental un- soundness, two distinct orders of questions may arise—questions of competency, and questions of responsibility. The competency of imbeciles to form contracts, and the validity of them when formed, has, in more than one instance, engaged the atten- tion of our courts of law. Persons of weak mind have been brought by improper influence to ally themselves in marriage, and the validity of such marriages has been disputed. The case of Portsmouth v. Portsmouth is an example of this kind. It was a suit of nullity of marriage on the ground of the mental un- soundness of the husband, the earl of Portsmouth. From the evidence of numerous witnesses it appeared, that he possessed a capacity and understanding fully equal to the ordinary transactions of life; that when at school he had a good memory, and became a respectable pro- ficient in arithmetic and the languages; and that after coming of age, he settled accounts with his agents, attended public meetings and com- mittees, prosecuted an offender, and was examined as a witness, and that his friends had failed in making him the object of a commission of lunacy. In regard to these circumstances, the court, Sir John Nicholl, observed in substance, that the capacity for instruction and improvement is possessed even by the brute creation, and therefore did not of itself disprove the fact of imbecility ; that when he appeared as a witness in a court of justice, it was only a simple fact he had to state, requiring little, if anything, more than memory, and that his cross-examination could require nothing more than the recollection of facts, not any considerable exercise of the understanding and of the reasoning powers; that his behaviour in company, and his few obser- vations on the state of the weather, horses and farming, were not incompatible with great imbecility of mind, because under the restraint produced by formal company, and by the sense of being observed, the more prominent features of imbecility would be shaded, and the indi-


[47/216 b3303073x_0002_0047.jp2]

LEGAL RELATIONS OF IMBECILITY. 227 vidual might pass as possessing a considerable degree of understand- ing. On the contrary, it was satisfactorily proved, that he had always been treated by his family as one of feeble capacity, and by a family arrangement, he was married, when thirty-two years of age, to a lady of forty-seven, evidently for the purpose of saving him from improper connections, and obtaining for him suitable care and protection. It appeared that his servants were his play-fellows, and that he played all sorts of tricks with them; that he was fond of driving a team, and that his wife so far indulged him as to have a team of horses kept for amusement, as a toy and a plaything, with which he carted dung, timber, and hay; that he had a propensity for bell-ringing, was fond of slaughtering cattle, and indulged in wanton cruelty towards man and beast, never expressing regret, but merely observing, “ serves him right,” on his own acts of cruelty. It also appeared that a medical man was taken into the family to assist in superintending the earl, and that he obtained complete ascendancy over him, the mention of his name being sufficient to intimidate him and exact his obedience. This gentleman at last thought it prudent to deliver up his charge to the earl’s trustees in London, one of whom, within one week after, married him to his own daughter. This marriage was declared by the court null and void.* From this case it appears that, in our courts of law, proof of imbeci- lity is not drawn from a few isolated facts, but from an investigation of the whole life character and conduct of the party. Medical men are often examined on commissions of lunacy, as to the competency of imbeciles to manage themselves and their affairs. In such a case as that just quoted, it would not be easy to establish the incompetency of the party, and it appears that, on a former occasion, the friends had failed in their attempt to take out a commission ; but in many, perhaps in the majority, of instances, there is but little diffi- culty. Thus, the author was recently summoned as witness in a case of imbecility traced to the long continuance and repeated occurrence of epileptic fits. The patient did not know how many pence there were in sixpence or a shilling, or how many shillings in a sovereign; could not perform the most ordinary operation of arithmetic, was ignorant of the date, the month, and the year; did not know the name of the reigning monarch ; could not recognise persons whom he had seen and conversed with only four days previously. His attention was aroused with the utmost difficulty, and could not be fixed to any one subject. His look was vacant, his dress peculiar, his gait awkward, his motions grotesque, his speech slow and hesitating. He used the same words and expressions again and again, repeated imperfectly the tasks and prayers of his childhood, and imitated the contortions of persons, like himself, subject to fits. Such a case could present no difficulty either to the medical witness or to the jury. % ag Haggard, 359, and Ray, p. 65. See also the case of Miss Bagster, Ray, p- °


[48/216 b3303073x_0002_0048.jp2]

228 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. In rare instances men have been pronounced incapable of managing their affairs, on the ground not so much of general weakness of in- tellect, as of a defective knowledge of numbers and of the value of money. Two such cases are related by Dr. Abercrombie, in one of which the most prominent character was a “ total inability to perform the most simple process of arithmetic,’’ and in the other “a total want of the power of tracing relations both as to time and numbers.” In the face of evidence showing that they had made much progress in their education, both were pronounced incapable of managing their affairs. The proof of imbecility, combined with undue influence, has, in numerous instances, been held to invalidate a will; but, in the absence of such influence, all that is required to establish the wills of people of weak understanding is, that they should have been capable of com- prehending their nature and effect.* Another question which may be raised respecting persons affected with imbecility is, as to their responsibility for crimes. This question, which is not of rare occurrence, may be illustrated by the following ease: “On the 14th of May, 1843, a young man, John Barclay, was executed at Glasgow, for the murder of Samuel Neilson, for whom he had previously showed some affection. He took from him three one-pound notes and a watch, to obtain possession of which seems to have been the cause of the murder. So little sense had he of having done wrong, or of his own situation, that he hovered about almost without disguise, and, while going to spend part of the money with the first person he spoke to, he dropped first one and then an- other note at his feet, as a child would have done. When questioned, he could see no difference between killing a man and killing an ox, except that he “ would never hear him fiddle again ;” and so little did he know of the nature of the watch, that he regarded it as an animal, and when it stopped from not having been wound up, believed it had died of cold from the glass being broken. So obvious was Barclay’s mental deficiency, that the court of justiciary, before whom he was brought, declined proceeding to his trial till it was decided by medical evidence that he wasa fit subject for trial. In his parish, he was familiarly known as “daft John Barclay ;” and the clergyman, who knew him well, “always regarded him as imbecile, and had never been able to give him any religious instruction, and did not consider him a responsible being.” Notwithstanding the fact that Barclay’s weakness of mind was recognised by all parties, from the judge downwards, and that the jury strongly recommended him to mercy on that account, he was condemned and executed.” In this well marked case of imbecility, “much stress was laid upon Barclay’s knowing right from wrong, as affording indisputable proof of his being a moral agent.” Ray very justly remarks “ the reader is left to judge for himself, how extensive and accurate must have been the notions * Shelford on Lunacy, 275. t Ray, op. cit. p. 80.


[49/216 b3303073x_0002_0049.jp2]

DEMENTIA. 229 on this point, of one who thought a watch was a living creature, and could see no difference between killing an ox, and killing aman.” He might have added, to whom the clergyman of his parish “ had never been able to give any religious instruction, and whom he did not con- sider a responsible being.” Several interesting cases of imbeciles, concerning whom the same question of responsibility was raised, are related and made the subject of judicious commentary, in Dr. Ray’s work already quoted. The subject of criminal responsibility will be again referred to, when the several forms of unsound mind have been passed in review. Haying now described and illustrated, the forms of unsound mind, which are either congenital or occur during early childhood, and are characterised by defective development or diminished activity of the faculties, it now remains to examine the second subdivision, or that form of unsoundness which occurs subsequent to the development of the faculties. DEMENTIA. This form of unsoundness is to be carefully distinguished from the forms of amentia just described. In idiocy the deficiency is congenital; in imbecility it occurs in early life; in dementia, on the contrary, it supervenes slowly or suddenly in a mind already fully developed. In the former case the faculties are imperfect, in the latter enfeebled ; the one class are as children who have never learned the duties ot manhood, the other as men who have not the energy or power to perform them; the one have been furnished with no ideas to exercise the memory or reason, the other have not the power to recall or to use those which they have acquired. Dementia differs from mania, on the other hand, inasmuch as the phenomena of the one arise out of the exhaustion and torpor of the faculties, those of the other from their intense excitement. The one is helpless from want of power, the other embarrassed by the rapid succession of his thoughts and impulses, The want of power, however, is not the only character of dementia ; for it is accompanied by positive derangement of the mind. The characters of dementia differ with its cause and mode of com- mencement, and with the period of life at which it occurs. That form of it which arises from sudden mental shocks often presents a distinct and very peculiar feature—The mind is, as it were, arrested and fixed for the remainder of life in sad abstraction on that one event. This form of dementia is well illustrated by the following cases :— *¢ In the asylum for the insane,” (at Christiana) “ I saw one curious case. The circumstances are these:—A fisherman was about to be married to a girl residing in one of the villages on the shore of the Christiania Fiord ; and the day before that appointed for the wed- ding, he took his boat to go to his bride’s house, to spend the night in feasting, as is the usual custom in Norway. She, accompanied by her parents, came to meet him; and while the two boats were return-


[50/216 b3303073x_0002_0050.jp2]

230 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. ing together, a sudden squall overset the boat which carried the bride, and she and her friends perished. But the circumstances are only remarkable, from the peculiar character they gave to the insanity of the fisherman. He sat from morning till night upon a small stool, . which he fancied a boat, his arms and body constantly in the attitude of rowing; and if any one appeared at the door, he warned his visitor to beware how he approached, as the water was deep.’’* In other instances, the effect of a sudden shock upon the mind is to occasion a state closely resembling imbecility. A case of this kind, unfortunately little creditable to the great man who bore a part in it, is related in a review of Sir John Malcolm’s Life of Lord Clive. Omichund had been employed by Lord Clive in important negotia- tions, under the promise of a reward of £300,000. When the time for fulfilling the promise had arrived, Omichund was suddenly in- formed that the written agreement which guaranteed the payment was null and void, and that he was to have nothing. ‘“* Omichund fell back insensible into the arms of his attendants. He revived, but his mind was irreparably ruined. From the moment of that sudden shock, the unhappy man sank gradually into idiocy (imbecility). He who had formerly been distinguished by the strength of his understanding, and the simplicity of his habits, now squandered the remains of his fortune in childish trinkets, and loved to exhibit himself dressed in rich gar- ments, and hung with precious stones. In this abject state he lan- guished a few months, and then died.” The following case related in the London Medical Repository,£ by the Reviewer of Beck’s Medical Jurisprudence, illustrates the same effect produced by a strong impression acting upon the mind during a long space of time. “The son of a respectable farmer had received the excellent and regular education which it is in the power of persons of limited means to bestow upon their children in Scotland, in order to qualify him for the medical profession; and he was actually pursuing his studies for that purpose, when he contracted, or persuaded himself he had con- tracted, a certain disorder, to which, among the moral inhabitants of the remoter districts, is attached every idea of shameful depravity. The sense of his situation seized with such force upon his (perhaps morbidly) sensitive mind, that the consequence, after twenty years’ possession of a superior degree of intellect, and the acquisition of at least a competent share of knowledge, was the utter extinction of the rational being, and his degradation to a mere mass of animal substance —of which the only remaining evidences for many years have been the continuance of the functions “indispensable for its existence, and of those which constitute him the most offensive of all nuisances in his hapless parents’ house. The want of food stimulates him to utter * A Personal Narrative of a Journey to Norway, &amp;c. By Derwent Conway. + Edinburgh Review, Jan. 1840. + No. 7, vol. li. New Series.


[51/216 b3303073x_0002_0051.jp2]

SENILE DEMENTIA. Q3t uncouth cries; but in the apparent scale of existence he has fallen below the meanest animal about his father’s walls.” During the earthquake panic of last year, the author had an oppor- tunity of observing a well-marked case of dementia in a lad of twelve years of age, brought on by the conversation of a knot of Irishmen in the dusk of the evening, concerning the expected visitation. The poor boy seemed deprived of all his faculties, was’ dull and listless, and answered every inquiry by a vacant smile. He occasionally had an access of terror and excitement, but soon relapsed into his state of stupor. Dementia also often follows upon severe attacks of fever, upon mania, melancholia, apoplexy, paralysis, or repeated attacks of epilepsy. In all these cases it may depend on a permanent disease of the brain. Senile Dementia, or that which is incidental to persons in advanced age, is the most simple and well-marked form of that variety of demen- tia which arises from causes acting slowly and gradually; for dementia supervening upon mania has a mixed character, combining the delu- sions and the excitements of the one with the loss of vigour of the other. The first symptom of approaching senile dementia is loss of the memory of recent events, without any impairment of the reasoning faculties. There is dulness of perception and apprehension, and an inability to fix the attention, or to follow any train of thought. The things which were heard five minutes since, are forgotton, and the same question is repeated over and over again. Hence, the transaction of business, requiring sustained attention, becomes impossible. The power of at- tention, and the controul of the will over the thoughts becoming more and more enfeebled, the reasoning powers sutter; for scarcely are the pre- mises laid down before they are forgotten, so that the act of comparison by which the conclusion is arrived at cannot be performed. Hence, after pursuing the same topic of conversation through part of a sen- tence, some accidental suggestion turns the ideas aside, and the expres- sion becomes absurd or irrelevant. Many individuals in this stage of the disorder recognise their friends, but they seldom display signs of emotion on seeing them; and they can still employ themselves me- chanically,—men in writing, and females in knitting and sewing. The next phase of the malady is one of complete incomprehension. At- tention, memory, and reason, being entirely lost, the instincts alone remaining in vigour, and being supported by a fair share of bodily force and activity, display themselves in strange actions. Some jump or run to and fro, or walk round perpetually in a circle; others dance, and sing, and vociferate. Many talk incessantly in the most unmeaning jargon; others pass their time in muttering half sentences, or broken expressions, in which it is scarcely possible to discover any link or connexion, or if any association can be traced, it is of the most trivial kind, and depending on a word, or on some sensible object, which for a moment attracts a degree of attention. Many, on the other hand, sit in silence with a tranquil countenance, sometimes with a vacant


[52/216 b3303073x_0002_0052.jp2]

232 " UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. look or unmeaning stare, and scarcely pronounce a syllable for weeks, months, or even years. A few remain crouched in a particular pos- ture, apparently uneasy and painful, but if placed in a different manner by those who have the care of them, they soon resume their habi- tual position. Many fatuous persons crowd round a stranger who happens to visit a lunatic asylum, having just enough intelligence to perceive something new; some have a propensity to adorn themselves in a strange manner; they take everything that happens to be in their way, and append it to their dress. In the last stage of all, even the animal instincts are lost; there is neither sensation, nor memory, nor thought, nor reason, but bare physical existence ; with occasionally, at distant intervals, a short resuscitation of some of the powers of the mind. “Sometimes an individual may be seen standing erect and his trunk: his eyes fixed upon the ground, never appearing, by any movement or gesture, to be conscious of external impressions, or even of his own existence. Another sits on a rocking-chair, which she agitates to and fro, and throws her limbs into the most uncouth posi- tions, at the same time chanting or yelling a dissonant song, only capable of expressing a total inanity of ideas and feelings. Many sit constantly still, with their chins resting upon their breasts, their eyes and mouths half open, unconscious of hunger or thirst, and almost destitute of the feelings which belong to mere physical life; they would never rise or lie down, were they not placed in bed. A great proportion of the patients who are reduced to this degree of fatuity, are found to have lost the use of their limbs, in a greater or less degree, by partial or general paralysis.”* It is scarcely necessary to add that in cases of dementia there may be every possible shade of mental affection between the excitement of mania, the partial glimmering of sense and reason, and the utter ex- tinction of all the faculties of the mind, which constitutes complete and simple dementia. In the majority of cases, the loss of intellect will be gradual and progressive, and it may be our duty as medical men to examine it at any stage of its decline. The description here given may render this examination more easy. Legal Relations of Dementia.—The questions most commonly raised respecting this form of unsoundness of mind relate to the validity of wills made or altered during that state. One case, that of Kindleside v. Harrison, will show the nature and difficulty of these questions. “The points contested in this case were four codicils to the will of an old gentleman, on the ground, that, at the time of making them, he was incapable, by reason of mental decay, of understanding their nature and effect. It was testified by some of the servants of his brother, who lived at a little distance from him, and by those of the lady with * Of the Different Forms of Insanity in Relation to Jurisprudence. By James Cowles Pritchard, M.D. pp. 228, 239.


[53/216 b3303073x_0002_0053.jp2]

MANIA. | 233 whom he, the deceased, resided, that during the two or three years within which the codicils were made, he frequently did not know people with whom he had previously been well acquainted, without being told who they were; that he would go about the house and. . garden looking around, and appearing not to know what he was about. On one occasion he not only did not recognise a certain person, but could not be made to understand who he was; and it was testified by a very different kind of witness, that the deceased asked him how old was witness’s father (though he had been dead sixteen years, and had been his partner in business), and soon after he inquired of the witness after his health, as if he were addressing another person. Several other similar lapses of memory, and various appearances of childish- ness in his conduct, were also revealed by the evidence, amply suffi- cient, no doubt, to induce superficial observers to believe that he was mentally incapacitated from disposing of property. It appeared, how- ever that he was in the habit of giving in favour of his brother’s butler, drafts accurately signed and filled up; that at Christmas- time, he gave the servants Christmas-boxes and the usual amount of money, and entered the sums in his account-book ; that he received a farmer’s bills for corn, and paid them with drafts on his banker, which he wrote himself, going through the whole business correctly; and that he docketed the bills and receipts on the back with the name of the person to whom paid, and the amount of the bills, making corres- ponding entries also in his private account-book ; that he signed twenty drafts at least one morning for payment of his brother’s debts, without instruction or assistance, subscribing his name as executor of his brother; that he would detect errors in the casting up of other people’s accounts; that he discharged his physician’s bills correctly ; and in short, that he managed his affairs, and that prudently and cor- rectly, to the last. It was also testified, that it was his practice to read aloud to the family the psalms and lessons of the day; that he was fond of a little fun, and played at whist remarkably well. That a person might haye done all this, and yet been unsound in mind, is certainly not impossible ; but it is far beyond the power of a mind so broken up by old age, and the invasion of disease, as to be incapable of altering testamentary dispositions already made. This consideration, and the fact that the circumstances of the case furnished abundant reasons for the alteration, induced the court to decide in favour of the capacity of the testator.”* MANIA. Tas term includes all those forms of unsoundness of mind which are characterised by undue excitement of the faculties. It differs therefore in a marked manner from those already described ; both _* Ray. Treatise on the Medical Jurisprudence of Insanity, p.199. 2 Phil- limore’s Reports, 449. R


[54/216 b3303073x_0002_0054.jp2]

234 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. in its legal relations, and in the tests by which its existence is ascer- tained. There is no legal term in common use which properly charac- terises this state ; and one of its most important forms, moral insanity, is as yet unrecognised by the law. The only legal term employed in a sense analogous to that of mania is duwnacy, which, as has been remarked, is objectionable from being founded on a variable feature of the disease. * Mania is divided in the table into three classes; General, Intellec- tual,and Moral ; and each of these latter into two subdivisions—General and Partial. General Mania.—There is a form of mania which affects both the intellect and the passions, and throws the whole mind into a state of mingled excitement and confusion. It is the counterpart of the in- coherent stage of dementia, and the form which, in some cases, mania assumes from the very first. It is thus characterised by Pinel :— *“* Rapid succession or uninterrupted alternation of insulated ideas, and evanescent and unconnected emotions; continually repeated acts of extravagance ; complete forgetfulness of every previous state; di- minished sensibility to external impressions; abolition of the faculty of judgment; perpetual activity.” There is another form of mania which is apt to be confounded with the foregoing variety, on the one hand, and with monomania on the other, but which, when carefully examined, will be found to be a general unsoundness, accompanied with undue excitement of the mind, the predominant feeling or passion merely taking the lead in the unsound, as it had previously done in the sound, mind. Both of these forms will be treated under the general term of Mania. Mania, under whatever form it may appear, except when it is the immediate consequence of injuries, moral shocks, or acute disease, is generally preceded by a change in the natural condition of mind and body, designated as the period of zxcubation. The following, with slight alterations, is the account given by Georget of this state :— Sometimes the cause acts strongly and rapidly; at other times, slowly and with less force. In the first case, madness breaks out at the end of some hours or days after a state of anxiety and uneasiness, with headache, sleeplessness, agitation or depression, and threatening of cerebral congestion; the patient begins to babble, cry, and sing, and becomes wild and agitated. He is then often taken for a person in a state of intoxication, and the mistake becomes apparent only after ex- amining the previous circumstances and duration of the malady. In the other case, thought is affected gradually and often very slowly ; the patient is generally conscious of some disorder in his intellectual facul- ties ; he is beset by new and odd notions, and by unusual inclinations ; he feels himself changing in his affections; but, at the samie time, he preserves a consciousness of his condition, is vexed at it, and tries to conceal it ; he continues his occupations as much as he can; and lastly, as many persons do in the first stage of intoxication, he makes every


[55/216 b3303073x_0002_0055.jp2]

SYMPTOMS OF MANIA. 235 effort to appear reasonable. Meantime his health continues to give way, and he either sleeps less or not at all; the appetite diminishes or disappears; sometimes digestion is difficult, and constipation super- venes; he grows thin, and the features alter. (In females the monthly discharge becomes irregular and scanty, and at last is altogether sus- pended.) At the same time there is observed something unusual, and even extraordinary, in the tastes of the patient, in his habits, his affec- tions, his character, and aptitude for business; if he was gay and communicative, he becomes.sad, morose, and averse to society ; if he was orderly and economical, he becomes confused and prodigal ; if he had long abstained from the pleasures of love, he becomes the victim of insatiable desires, and either seeks to associate with the other sex, or has recourse to disgraceful practices; if he was moderate in his © political and religious opinions, he passes to an extreme exaggeration in both; if he was open and candid, he becomes suspicious and jealous; - if a wife, she regards her husband and children with indifference ; the merchant neglects his business; tears and laughter succeed each other without apparent motive; the exterior of candour and modesty gives place to an air of conceit and assurance, which, especially in women, astonishes us. But all these phenomena are less prominent than they may appear to be in this description; and unless the individual have been insane before, no one may suspect the nature of the ailment which torments him ; all the questions put to him lead to no results, except that of fatiguing and giving him pain, for the ignorance that prevails relative to madness leads the friends to indulge in offensive insinua- tions, and to charge him with frivolous accusations, from not perceiving that he is under the influence of disease, and not of reason. In some cases, the appetite is unaffected from the first ; in others, it is impaired for a time, but speedily recovered, as well as the func- tions of digestion, nutrition, &amp;c.; and it is in these circumstances that the conduct of the patient gives rise to a host of interpretations on the part of his relatives and the public.* The duration of this period of :zcubation is often very considerable —as much as fifteen or twenty years. During this long period the patient is often misunderstood, and when he breaks out into furious mania, the attack is attributed to some slight contradiction or some cause equally inadequate to produce it. Sooner or later this disorder of the cerebral functions becomes of a more obvious and positive character. The struggle between the con- victions of reason, and the impulses of this new condition ceases ; and. the patient, instead of contending against the approaches of disease, or of concealing his thoughts, now believes in their reality, and openly and strenuously avows them, except when induced by powerful rea- sons to pursue a contrary course. The symptoms of physical derange- ment are also more striking and numerous. A febrile excitement pervades the system ; the pulse is accelerated ; the eyes have a wild * Dictionaire de Médicine, art. Folie.


[56/216 b3303073x_0002_0056.jp2]

236 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. and glassy look; the sensations have become either more acute or more obtuse, and the patient complains of pain, sense of weight and giddiness in the head, and ringing in the ears. In this stage of mania, a singular insensibility to external impressions is often wit- nessed, so that intense cold, heat, hunger, and thirst, are borne to a wonderful degree not only without uneasiness, but even without cons- ciousness-of the fact, so that the patient abstains both from food and drink for long intervals of time. Hunger and thirst occasionally, however, exist to a great degree. He sleeps little, and his slumbers are disturbed by frightful dreams.* The muscular power is often in- ordinately developed, the waking moments being a scene of almost constant restlessness and agitation ; while at others there is an equally unnatural sluggishness and indisposition to move about. The state of the mind is so various at different times in the same patient, and varies so much in different patients, that no general description can possibly do this part of the subject justice. It is because general descriptions, mixing up all the faculties of the mind and all their delusions and perversions together, are wanting in accu- racy, and on that account in usefulness, that the division in the table into ¢éntellectual and moral mania, and these again into general and partial, has been adopted. Having now given a description of mania both in its stage of zncu- bation, and in that of its complete development, from the work of a man in his sound senses, an esteemed authority on this subject, it may be useful to subjoin a case of mania sketched by the hand of a madman, a sketch which has all the appearance of being a faithful one, and likely to be in some respects more correct than any case drawn from observation can be. This curious history forms the subject-matter of a work of nearly three hundred octavo pages, and is evidently written by one who has passed from well-marked mania through several stages of improvement to a state of comparative sanity. The history opens with an account of one of the most severe family afflictions which it could fall to the lot of man to suffer. He represents himself as having been brought up reli- giously, and as having strong religious feelings, but joined with all the inconsistency which too often accompanies a religion of feeling. He joins the so-called evangelical party, becomes a zealous preacher, and mistakes his zeal for a certain sign of election. Believing himself secure in his election, and trusting to be kept from sin by the Holy Spirit, he became, as he tells us, lukewarm and inconsistent, and fell into sin. Still zealous and enthusiastic, though strangely inconsistent, in his religion, he next, during earnest prayer, sees visions, “pictures of what soon came to pass in reality, but with certain variations.” We next find him * Ray, op. cit. p. 101. + A Narrative of the Treatment experienced by a Gentleman during a state of Mental Derangement; designed to explain the Causes and the Nature of In- sanity, &amp;c London, 1838.


[57/216 b3303073x_0002_0057.jp2]

4 AUTOBIOGRAPHY OF A MANIAC, 237 among the Rowites, listening to the unknown tongues, and soon exer- cising the gift of tongues himself, singing unintelligible nonsense in beautiful tones which affected his mind greatly, or speaking under the supposed guidance of the Holy Spirit, which moved his arms and fingers, and guided him to distinct passages of the bible in regular connexion with his line of argument. Soon after this, he is put under the care of a physician, and after a longer interval is confined in an asylum. At first we find him doubting his delusions and doubting his physicians, and his delusion forbidding him to trust to human means, while his reason insists on their efficacy, he halves the difference by taking half the physic which has been ordered him. Then he hears voices addressing him, and, believing them to be the voices of spirits, he gives himself up to their guidance, however ridiculous the things they bid him do. Now they put him in one absurd posture, then in another, making him turn round like a top, desiring him to leap over stiles, to suffocate himself with his pillow, and to wrestle with his keepers —-and always with the notion that by so doing, some great good is to be obtained—no less a good than his own salvation, and that of his fellow- creatures. The confusion into which he is thrown by the struggles between the absurd suggestions of his spirits, and the faint glimmerings of his own reason is dreadful, and he finishes one of them by inwardly cursing the Holy Trinity. All this time he seems to have doubted the reality of the voices and of the spirits, for he says, “I had a species of doubt, but no one who has not been deranged can understand how dread- fully true a lunatic’s Insane imaginations appear to him, how slight his sane doubts.” As the confused workings of his mind are supposed to be the commands of spirits, so the sensations of his own body are falsely interpreted as parts of imaginary scenes, just as sensations occurring in sleep are known to be immediately worked up by the imagination into the texture of some improbable occurrence.* All the faculties of his mind seem to suffer. The senses deceive him ; he has false perceptions with regard to objects really existing, and sees hears and feels that which has no existence. His imagination, under the influence of his delusion, makes him the sport of a thousand fancies which sense and reason strive in vain to correct. If anything is diffi- cult to explain, his delusion takes the office of interpreter ; if anything appears absurd in action, his delusion was the cause of it. He resists his keepers, because his spirits tell him that they wish it: he is taught that he can help a fellow-creature in distress by spinning round upon his heel ; he throws himself on the ground or over every stile he comes to, because to do such things in decision and precision is meritorious. The first truths which men in their senses believe, without being led to the belief by reason or sense, are by him disbelieved. He can be in many places at the same time, in Portugal and England, in Heaven and on Earth; at one time, he is himself the hero of a story which he has long before heard told in a foreign country, and becomes the per- See p. 214.


[58/216 b3303073x_0002_0058.jp2]

238 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. petrator of unheard-of enormities; at another, he is being crucified in different parts of the earth at the same instant. His keepers are one moment no less important personages than the maker of all things, or the saviour of mankind, at another he knows them for what they are, and complains of their cruelty towards him. His moral sense, too, is blunted, and all his natural affections perverted. His mother and family are the objects of his hatred and aversion, even at the time that he is giving proof of their affectionate care for him. Such is a well-marked, example of general mania, presenting a wild confusion of mind and feeling, with one of the higher senti- ments to which education and habit had given power, taking the lead of all the rest, giving its own colouring to every thought, and its own direction to every action. It is in this mixed and confused form that mania often presents itself—the intellect and the moral feelings suffer- ing together, and the entire mind being the seat of strange and inex- tricable confusion. Intellectual Mania.—In some instances, mania seems to be almost entirely confined to the intellectual faculties, which are exercised with much excitement, the moral faculties being but little if at all affected. It is to this form of mania that the following description of Pinel ap- plies: “ The patient sometimes keeps his head elevated and his looks fixed on high; he speaks in a low voice, or utters cries and vocife- rations without apparent motive; he walks to and fro, and some- times arrests his steps as if excited by the sentiment of admiration, or wrapped up in profound reverie.” It would probably be more correct to say that, in certain cases, some strong passion displays itself chiefly by its effect upon the intel- lect. Such a passion is pride or vanity; and it is with regard to such cases that it has been well observed, “none are so liable as the proud to this most humiliating of all afflictions.” The following case is a good illustration of this form of mania: A young medical student suddenly took it into his head, that he should realise a fortune by attaining academical honours. He accord- ingly entered himself at Cambridge, and so injured his health by fruit- less application to study, as at length to fall into a state of decided derangement, of which vanity was the predominant and characteristic feature. This young man stated, that he was the Farnese Hercules ; that it was he, in fact, that had written Dr. Clarke’s Travels in Russia ; that he had done a job also for Virgil, that is, had composed his Aineid ; that one of the finest paintings of Raffaelle had been executed by him ; that he knew everything.* The following characteristic letter fur- nishes a good illustration of this form of mania :— Dec. 4th, 1832. “To Esqre. “IT am Lord President of the Counsil, a most honourable situation, and the richest gift of the Crown, which brings me in 7000£ every * Reid on Insanity, p. 51.


[59/216 b3303073x_0002_0059.jp2]

PARTIAL INTELLECTUAL MANIA. 239 year. The Counsil consists of three Secretaries of State, of which I am one; and the Paymaster of the Forces. When the king William the Forth shall die, then shall be crowned King of England, and be crowned in Westminster Abbey, By the Lord Archbishop of Canter- bury, I shall, on the occasion of my coronation, have placed in the different street of London one thousand pipes of wine for my people, and at night, in the Hyde Park a magnificent display of fireworks, and one hundred pieces of artillery shall fire three rounds for the amusement of my people and subjects. I have only now to give you a list of my titles and honors—King of England—First heir presump- tive to the Crown—Major-general and Field Martiall—Duke of Leitzep —Prince of Denmark—Lord President of the Counsil—Knight Ban- neret—Lord Treasurer of the Exchequer— Lieutenant Colonel— Lord and Baronet—Aid de Camp to the King! Champion of England !— Dear , 1 wish to acquaint you that Windsor Castle belongs to me, that the Palace of Brighton belongs to me, also I purchased from the Duke of Wellington the splendid Park and Palace of Strathfield- sea, wherein there are very extensive forests of Oak and of Pine trees, together with a very magnificent sheet of water containing ells and salmon trout—Dear I have to beg that you give my love and duty to your wife, and give this letter to read I pray you, according to my disire and wish.’* Partial Intellectual Mania. This was formerly called melancholia, from the mistaken notion that such partial affections of the intellect are always of a gloomy character. Esquirol showed that this view of the case was incorrect ; for, as he justly observes, the ideas of such per- sons are not always gloomy, but, on the contrary, oftentimes ex- tremely gay and pleasant. This author substituted the term mono- mania, which is now generally received. The most simple form of this disorder is that in which the patient has taken up some single notion opposed to common sense, and per- sonal experience. Of this kind is a case mentioned by Sir George Mackenzie.+ “I knew one,” he says, “ who seemed a discreet person, and could converse most pertinently in everything, till they spoke of the moon; but, upon hearing that named, fell instantly a staring, and into great extravagancies, believing himself to be secre- tary to the moon.” In many cases, this single delusive idea relates to, or is occasioned by, some bodily sensation or disease, which the monomaniac, like the dreamer, associates with imaginary accompaniments, and interprets by the aid of his delusion. Thus, Esquirol tells us of a woman who insisted that she was pregnant with the devil, and in her womb there was found after death a mass of hydatids; of another, in the Salpétriere, who imagined that a regiment of soldiers lay concealed in * On the Arrangement and Nomenclature of Mental Disorders, By Henr- Johnson, M.D. Edin The original spelling is retained. {~ Reason, an Essay, 1790.


[60/216 b3303073x_0002_0060.jp2]

240 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. her hing: and that she could feel them struggling and fighting with each other; and of a third, who believed that the apostles and evangelists had taken up their abode in her bowels, and were occasion- the last two cases the intestines were found agglutinated together in consequence ef chronic peritonitis. But such hallucinations are not always dependent upon real sensations, as is proved by the cures which have been effected bya very laudable. species of deception. Thus, a patient, after thinking himself cured of a serpent in his bowels by means of a pretended surgical operation, suddenly took up the idea, that the creature had left its ova behind, ready to be hatched into a brood of young ones, but was again restored by.the dexterous reply of his physician, that the snake was a male.* It must not be supposed that these cases of partial intellectual mania comprise all the cases designated by the term monomania. It is probable that there are very few cases of this extremely simple kind. In most instances the affection of the mind doubtless goes beyond a single insane idea, and influences more or less extensively the thoughts ‘and the conduct, being marked by other intellectual and moral inconsistencies; and there is reason to believe, that many cases of so-called monomania are examples of general mania, characterised _ by the immoderate activity of some one faculty. Moral Mania. It was Pinel who first directed the attention of the profession to moral insanity. Previous to his time, insanity was generally considered as either exclusively, or chiefly, a malady of the reasoning faculties. Participating in the prevalent belief of the suffi- ciency of a few faculties to explain all the phenomena of the sound and unsound mind, and doubtless influenced by the prevalent metaphysical doctrines of his time, he found, to his great surprise, that there were at the Bicétre many maniacs ‘ who betrayed no lesion whatever of the understanding, but were under the dominion of instinctive and ab- stract fury, as if the affective faculties alone had sustained injury.” This form of mental disorder he designated as manie sans délire. The examples which he records are chiefly those of violent anger and fury, illustrating only one phase of the disorder. Since his time the reality and great importance of this distinction between intellectual and moral mania have been recognised by practical ob- servers, amongst’ whom are to be found the well known names of Esquirol, Georget, Gall, Rush, Keil, Heinroth, Hoffbauer, Cox, Andrew Combe, Abercrombie, Conolly, Pritchard, and Ray.  Prit- chard has treated this subject with great ability, and has clearly made out, that moral generally precedes intellectual, insanity; that it is in fact the commencement of it. He defines moral mania as “ consisting in a morbid perversion of the natural feelings, affections, inclinations, temper, habits, and moral dispositions, without any notable lesion * Ray, op. cit. p. 110. taf Se


[61/216 b3303073x_0002_0061.jp2]

GENERAL MORAL MANTA. QAY of the intellect, or knowing and reasoning faculties, and particularly without any maniacal hallucination.” General Moral Mania. In describing this form of mental un- soundness, we shall follow closely the description of Dr. Pritchard :— There are many individuals living at large in society, who are reputed persons of a singular, wayward, and eccentric character. An attentive observer will often recognise something remarkable in their manners and habits, which may lead-him to entertain doubts as to their sanity ; and on inquiry his suspicions are often strengthened by finding that an hereditary tendency to madness has existed in the family, that several of the relations have laboured under other diseases of the brain, or that the individual himself, in a former period of his life, has had a decided attack of madness. His temper and disposition are found to have undergone a change; to be not what they were previously to a certain time; he has become an altered man, and the difference has perhaps been noted from the period when he sustained some reverse of fortune, which deeply affected him, or the loss of some beloved relative, or some severe shock: to-his constitution,—some febrile or inflammatory disorder affecting the brain, a slight attack of. paralysis, or a fit of epilepsy. .In some cases, the alteration in temper and habits has been gradual and imperceptible, and seems to have consisted only in an exaltation or increase of peculiarities which were always more or less natural and habitual. Persons labouring under this disorder are capable of reasoning, or supporting an argument, upon any subject within their sphere of knowledge, and they often display great ingenuity in giving reasons for the eccentrici- ties of their conduct, and in accounting for and justifying their ex-— isting state of moral feeling. In one sense, indeed, their intellectual faculties may be termed unsound ; they think and act under the in- fluence of strongly excited feelings, and persons accounted sane are under such circumstances proverbially liable to error both in judgment and conduct. Hoffbauer, who has written very ably on the subject of insanity, recognises this form of mental unsoundness. “ It is clear,” he Says, “that mania may exist uncomplicated with mental delusion ; it is, in fact, only a kind of mental exaltation (toll- hett), a state in which the reason has lost its empire over the passions and the actions by which they are manifested, to stich a degree, that the individual can neither repress the Gomaen: nor abstain from the latter. It does not follow that he may not be in possession of his senses, and even of his usual intelligence, since, in order to resist the impulses of the passions, it is not sufficient that the reason should im- part its counsels,—we must have the necessary power to obey them. The maniac may judge correctly of his actions without being in a * Cyc. Prac. Med., art. Insanity. 7 A Treatise on Insanity, &amp;c. by James Cowles Pritchard, M.D., pp. 12 &amp; 13.


[62/216 b3303073x_0002_0062.jp2]

242, UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. condition to repress his passions, and to abstain from the acts of vio- lence. to which they impel him.” He subsequently observes, that * when mania proceeds from inordinate passions, “ its more immediate cause lies in the physical temperament, or in certain moral affections which induce frequent occasions of anger. In every other respect, the maniac may be master of his propensities, and the actions to which they lead ;. he may judge and act rationally. He is irrational only in his paroxysms of fury, and then his errors of judgment are rather the effect than the cause of his furious transports.” * This form of mental unsoundness is illustrated in the works of Pritchard and Ray, by a large number of cases, which may be con- sulted with advantage. One of the most remarkable of these is that of Frederick William of Prussia, father of Frederick the Great, who, in consequence of long indulgence in spirituous liquors, became hypochondriacal, and the strange, wayward, and cruel tyrant of his family and household. His religious austerities, his disgusting and brutal. behaviour to his children, his unfounded hatred of his own son, and repeated attempts upon his life, his solitary attempt upon his own life, his course of steady and unswerving persecution of the innocent objects of his suspicion and dislike, without any delusion beyond that which might fairly be regarded as the offspring of his hate—present a striking picture of general moral mania. Partial Moral Mania. This consists in an exorbitant activity of some one passion or propensity, and its predominance or complete mastery over every other. The faculty thus affected prompts the in- dividual to action by a kind of irresistible instinct, while he either retains the most perfect consciousness of its impropriety, and horror at the enormity of the conduct to which it would impel him, and with difficulty restrains himself, or gives way, as if in desperation, to the impulse which urges him on. There is not one of the stronger impulses of our nature that may not be thus urged into an activity which may place it beyond the re- straint of reason and conscience. The following are examples of some of the principal forms of partial moral mania. Cleptomania, or propensity to theft. “* There are persons,” says Dr. Rush, “ who are moral to the high- est degree as to certain duties, but who, nevertheless, live under the influence of some one vice. In one instance, a woman was exemplary in her obedience to every command of the moral law except one—she could not refrain from stealing. What made this vice more remark- able was, that she was in easy circumstances, and not addicted to ex- travagance in anything. Such was the propensity to this vice, that when she could lay her hands upon nothing more valuable, she would * Hoffbauer, Die Psychologie in ihren hauptanwendungen auf die Rechts- pflege, §§ 26—46, and Ray, p. 118.


[63/216 b3303073x_0002_0063.jp2]

SUICIDAL AND HOMICIDAL MANIA. 243 often at the table of a friend fill her pockets secretly with bread. She both confessed and lamented her crime.” Many such cases are on record. This propensity to theft is also a common feature of mania, ~ and accompanies the paroxysms. Pritchard mentions the curious case of a lunatic who would never eat his food unless he had previously stolen it. Lying is sometimes a form of partial moral mania. Erotomania, or amorous madness. The following case, among many others, is quoted from Gall: ‘ A man had lived many years in a happy and fruitful union, and had acquired by his industry a re- spectable fortune. After having retired from business, and led an idle life, his predominant propensity gradually obtained the mastery over him, and he yielded to his desires to such a degree that, though still in possession of his reason, he looked on every woman as a victim destined to gratify his sensual appetite. The moment he perceived a female from his window, he announced to his wife and daughters, with an air of the utmost delight, the bliss that awaited him. Final- ly, this partial mania degenerated into general mania, and shortly after he died in an insane hospital at Vienna.” * Sometimes this propensity attacks virtuous females, who view their excited ‘passions with horror and remorse. Pyromania, or a morbid propensity to ¢nxcendiarism. “ A young girl of a quiet, inoffensive disposition, and whose character had been hitherto exemplary, made seven different attempts at incendiarism in a village near Cologne. When interrogated as to the motives which had prompted her to act so wickedly, she burst into tears, confessing that at certain periods she felt her reason forsake her, and that then she was irresistibly impelled to the commission of a deed which, when done, she bitterly repented. She was acquitted by a jury of all criminal intentions.’ Suicidal Monomania. Much difference of opinion has existed as to the real state of mind of self-murderers. The fact of suicide having been generally practised, and sanctioned by philosophers and lawgivers of past times, and of its still being in common use in a nation which has attained in many respects a high civilisation—the Chinese—has led some to the belief that it is not always the result of an insane im- pulse. The calm and deliberate manner in which the crime has been perpetrated, and the apparent soundness of the reasons alleged in its favour, have been somewhat strangely used as arguments against the opinion of those who attribute suicide in all cases to insanity. &lt;A better reason for believing it to be, occasionally at least, altogether in- dependent of insanity is, that two persons have been known to com- bine for the purpose of self-destruction ; such union of purpose being extremely rare in the case of the insane. The argument drawn from national usage in ancient and modern * Ray, p. 130, et seq. + Med. Chir. Rey., July, 1836, p. 216.


[64/216 b3303073x_0002_0064.jp2]

244 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. times cannot be allowed much weight, for who would hesitate to cha- racterize an English widow who should burn herself on the death of her husband, as insane? and yet such self-sacrifice was until recently both a virtue and a custom in India. Some nations, again, have a custom of eating human flesh, but in a recent case of infanticide which occurred in France, the fact that the mother cooked a portion of her child, and eat of it, and then offered the dish to her husband, was justly regarded as a strong evidence of insanity.* A careful consideration of recorded cases of suicide cannot but lead to the conclusion, that a considerable number, at least, are the result of insane impulse; and this conclusion is strengthened by the frequent attempts at self-destruction made by the acknowledgedly insane. The extraordinary modes of death selected might also be used as an addi- tional argument in favour of insanity in certain cases.+ It may be added, that some of our highest authorities, as Foderé and Esquirol, have strongly maintained the necessary dependence of suicide on insanity. Homicidal Mania. The most distinguished authors, both at home and abroad, have recognised this form of mental unsoundness, as hay- ing an existence independent of delusion. The cases on record are so numerous, that the only difficulty is that of selection. The following is a remarkable one :—“ William Brown was executed at Maidstone, in 1812, for strangling a child whom he accidentally met one morning while walking in the country. On the trial, he said he had never seen the child, had no malice against it, and could assign no motive for the dreadful act. He took up the body and laid it on some steps, and then went and told what he had done, requesting to be taken into custody. He bore an exemplary character, and had never been sus- pected of being insane.” t Women seem to have been more frequently than men the victims of this propensity to destroy, and sometimes this excited feeling has led to the commission of infanticide.§ Females suffering from grief, or anxiety, from habitual discharges, at the menstrual period, at the change of life, and soon after delivery, are thrown into a peculiar ner- vous state, which is well characterised by the name of mimosis in- quieta. This excited condition of the nervous system is sometimes accompanied by a strong impulse to crime, mixed with an overwhelm- ing fear of giving way to the propensity. Cases of this kind fre- quently present themselves among the out-patients of the hospital. Of Mania with Lucid intervals. Mania, in a considerable number of cases, assumes a recurrent or intermittent form, the patient in the interval being in his right mind. The proportion which such cases bear to those of complete recovery has been variously stated. Accord- * Annales d’ Hygiéne, tom. viii. p. 397. y+ As an example, see the curious frontispiece, and corresponding case a p- 331, of Mr. Forbes Winslow’s Anatomy of Suicide. { Ray, p. 137. § See p. 160. ; || See the King’s College Hospital Report for 1842, Medical Gazette.


[65/216 b3303073x_0002_0065.jp2]

GENERAL CHARACTERISTICS, Q45- ing to Pinel, one in six; according to Esquirol, one in ten were recur- rent. M. Despartes states the number as one in six, or one in seven.* The interval is various. Esquirol has seen cases assume the quoti- dian, tertian, and quartan type; or the interval has been that of a month, or it has recurred with the same season of the year. More frequently the attacks occur at uncertain intervals, and are of uncer- tain duration. This recurrent mania, with intervals of complete sanity, must not be confounded with those periods of comparative tranquillity which, like lulls in a storm, occur in most cases of mania. With regard to such intervals of comparative repose, Haslam remarks that, “ as a constant observer of this disease for more than twenty-five years, he cannot affirm that the lunatics, with whom he had daily intercourse, have manifested alternations of insanity and reason. They may at intervals become more tranquil, and less dis- posed to obtrude their distempered fancies into notice. For a time their minds may be less active, and the succession of their thoughts consequently more deliberate; they may endeavour to effect some desirable purpose, and artfully conceal their real opinions; but they have not abandoned nor renounced their distempered notions. It is as unnecessary to repeat, that a few coherent sentences do not constitute the sanity of the intellect, as that the sounding of one or two notes of a keyed instrument could not ascertain it to be in tune.” The legal relations of mania with lucid intervals are important. The law generally views civil acts done in lucid intervals as if they were performed by a person in a permanently sound state of mind; it ad- mits the validity of wills made during such intervals, and has on more than one occasion admitted the reasonableness of the will as proof of a lucid interval With regard to criminal acts, it makes a reason- able distinction; for it justly regards the condition of unsoundness as one readily reproduced by provocation or excitement: accordingly no case has occurred in which a person has been convicted of crime committed during a lucid interval.t The legal relations of the other forms of mania will be considered in the following division. 4, OF SOME OF THE MORE IMPORTANT CHARACTERS OF THE UNSOUND MIND, AND OF THE LEGAL AND MEDICAL TESTS OF THAT UN- SOUNDNESS. A knowledge of the individual characters of mental unsoundness, is of the first importance both to the lawyer and to the physician. A general description of the several forms of unsound mind, without such a résumé of its characteristics, would present but an imperfect view of * Pritchard on the various forms of Insanity, in relation to Jurisprudence, p. 184. 7 Case of Cartwright v, Cartwright, Pritchard on the different forms of In- sanity, p. 197. + Ray, p. 246.


[66/216 b3303073x_0002_0066.jp2]

246 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. the subject, and leave in obscurity the great questions which arise out of it. It is proposed, therefore, in this place, to establish by appeal to facts, some of the more remarkable phenomena of mental unsound- ness, as a preliminary to the discussion of the chief legal questions which arise out of that state, and to prescribe, for the guidance of the medical witness, such rules as these phenomena shall be found to suggest. The objects, then, of the present inquiry are the suggestion of true tests, and the discrimination of real and feigned unsoundness. The principal distinction already established between unsoundness from defective development, and unsoundness from excessive activity, will be found fully borne out by a consideration of the chief characters of the two forms, which will accordingly be discussed separately in this place. Of the Characters of Unsoundness of Mind from Defective Development or Diminished Activity of the Faculties. There is a simplicity about this part of the subject which does not belong to the other, and the principal characters are more easily deduced from the foregoing descriptions. The law, in reference to this form of unsoundness, moreover, is more simple and more in ac- cordance with medical experience, and its decisions have been more uniform. The appearance of the idiot or imbecile is in itself almost decisive, and scarcely requires confirmation from an actual inquiry into his mental condition. Difficulty of arousing and fixing the attention ; slowness and weakness of comprehension ; forgetfulness of recent oc- currences; ignorance of social relations; unconsciousness of familiar things, even of such as immediately concern a man’s self, as his age, the place in which he lives, and the mode in which he passes his time, the year, the month, and date of the month; ignorance of those public persons and events which are the most frequent topics of conversation, and most familiar to those who take an interest in the common affairs of life, as the name of the reigning monarch, of the prime minister, &amp;c.; a scanty knowledge of arithmetic and of the value of money, an imperfect knowledge of right and wrong, and of the state of the law in regard to the most common and familiar crimes ;— may be mentioned among the characters of the several forms of un- soundness from defective development. In ordinary and extreme cases of imbecility there can be no diffi- culty in forming a decision as to the competency of the individual to take care of himself and his affairs, to form contracts, to devise pro- perty, &amp;c.; but where the imbecility exists in a less degree, the question is by no means of this simple nature, and cases have occur- red in which there has been room for much difference of opinion. In this class of cases it generally happens that the individual in question


[67/216 b3303073x_0002_0067.jp2]

CASE OF MR. EDWARD DAVIES. 247 has, for some part of his life, been at liberty, and entrusted with the management of his affairs. Hence an additional test is pro- vided in a comparison of his existing with his former state of mind. It is strange that this simple and obvious test was overlooked by the medical witness, till it was distinctly and forcibly pointed out by the late Dr. Gooch in the course of some able strictures on the case of Mr. Edward Davies.* As this case is one of considerable interest, ae the reviewer well observes “by far the most important lunatic case which has been tried in our time,”) and as, moreover, it affords a striking illustration of the principle applicable to every form of mental unsoundness, viz., that the state of the mind, at the time it 1s a subject of inquiry, should be compared with its former condition, a short account of it is here subjoined. Mr. Edward Davies was born of humble parents, and though at school very shy and reserved, had the character of being quick and intelligent. On leaving school, he commenced the business of a tea- dealer in London, and by great industry and careful management grew rapidly rich. His health was habitually delicate, he was a dyspeptic, and subject to strong nervous excitement. He was fond of reading medical books; and, like most persons who indulge in such a taste, was fanciful about his complaints, and subject to false alarms. He endeayoured to remedy the defects of his early education by reading what he conceived to be the best authors, and was often guilty of making a ridiculous display of his acquirements, by long quotations which he would spout with a theatrical air. He was of a remarkably timid and yielding disposition, so that, though twenty-seven years of age, and carrying on an extensive and lucrative business, he became completely subject to the authority of his mother. She would not allow him to carry any money in his pocket, or to spend the most trifling sum without her permission. He dared not quit the house for a few hours, or visit the play, without her leave. She was at great pains to prevent him meeting with young women whose personal qualifications seemed likely to engage him, lest he should marry, and she be displaced from the management of his house and the controul of his purse, for she took various opportunities of inducing him to give considerable sums of money to different branches of her family. ‘°* It appears, then, that this tea-dealer, in his natural or habitual state of mind, was easily agitated, anxious and fanciful about his complaints, vain of his self-taught literary acquirements, fond of spouting quota- tions with great emphasis and gesture, abjectly timid ; yet with all these singularities and infirmities, an able and successful tradesman, and in all the affairs of life, thoroughly competent to take care of himself and his property.” Mr. Davies having attained the age of twenty-seven, grew restive under his mother’s restraint, and made * Quarterly Review, 1830.


[68/216 b3303073x_0002_0068.jp2]

248 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND, many attempts to emancipate himself, offering her most liberal and reasonable terms; but she was not to be got rid of at any price. This incessant state of contention acting on a feeble body, a sensitive mind, and not a very firm understanding, soon began to impair both his bodily health and his mental tranquillity. In this state he applied successively to Mr. Lawrence and Dr. Latham, and was seen by several persons, to whom he exhibited all his former peculiarities mingled with an incoherence and excitement which led them to con- sider him unsound in his mind, though Mr. Lawrence thought that his antipathy to his mother was “his chief delusion!” and Dr. La- tham was not prepared to recommend “that he should be shut up as an acknowledged lunatic.” It is remarkable that on the same days on which Mr. Lawrence, Dr. Latham, and others saw him in this highly excited state, his friends, who had known him long, passed hours with him; and though they found him ill and terrified, he ap- peared to them quite himself, and as equal as he had ever been to give directions about his affairs; indeed, the very persons who were trying to confine him as unfit to take care of his business, were them- selves consulting him about the management of that business. Mr. Davies, shortly after this period, was removed to a private mad-house, where he remained till the end of December, when he was released by the verdict of a jury. Here his agitation subsided; his incoherence, as it had been called, diminished almost to nothing; and the only remaining grounds for believing him a lunatic, were his antipathy to At this time he was what his oldest friends affirmed him to have been all his lifetime, and yet it was the opinion of the physicians sent to examine him, that he was mad and unfit to be released. On the strength of their evidence the Lord Chancellor granted a commission. The medical evidence in this case is curious in many respects, but there is not space to display it at length. The following scarcely ex- aggerated summary of the reviewer will show upon what slight grounds many of the medical witnesses built their opinion of Mr. Davies’s insanity, and of the necessity for his confinement. “ In Eng- land people are shut up in mad-houses if they learn to box,—go to the gymnasium to fence,—employ the junior solicitor when they cannot get the senior,—are over vain of a smattering of literature,—spout poetry with a theatrical air,—are long-winded, prosy, and muddle- headed, —read medical books, and are fanciful about their complaints, —refuse, when they are twenty-seven years of age, and worth many thousands of pounds, to live with their mothers, because their mothers without asking leave, (who consequently form a strong antipathy to such amiable parents,)—who having gained riches in early manhood, get uneasy of inhaling, summer and winter, the atmosphere of a city lane, and actually buy a villa near town for their occasional refresh- ment,;—who will not confess that they have been mad simply because


[69/216 b3303073x_0002_0069.jp2]

TESTS OF IMBECILITY. ‘949 they do not. believe it,—if Englishmen be guilty of such horrors as these, they are pronounced insane,—they are shut up in mad-houses,— and the management of their business is taken out of their hands, although, notwithstanding all their singularities, they have conducted it, for a long term of years, with consummate skill and extraordinary success ! ” The writer adds, “out of five cases of supposed lunacy, about which a medical friend of ours has been consulted by an eminent law officer, within the last two years, three of the individuals—more than half the number—had been confined, and would have continued to be confined, for the following reasons:—one, because his antipathy to his friends, who had shut him up, as he believed, unnecessarily, was disproportioned to the cause !—the second, because, in addition to a general singularity of appearance, and manners, and mode of express- ing himself, he believed his wife’s last child was not his own; this was set down as a delusion, though all the neighbourhood believed the same, and the history of his marriage, his decrepit appearance, the more youthful wife, and the vigorous lover, rendered it highly probable ;—the third was Mr. Edward Davies.” The commission, after a careful consideration of the evidence in all its bearings, restored Mr. Edward Davies to liberty, and the manage- ment of his property. He made wise and advantageous arrangements, disposed of his business to his mother, and retired to indulge his inno- cent eccentricities on an estate in Wales. One more extract from the review of Dr. Gooch will point the moral of this tale. “ Tt is necessary to know how a man commonly acts under ordinary circumstances, in order to judge of his actions when placed under ex- traordinary ones. In examining the condition of a man’s mind, for the purpose of determining whether it is sound or not, some standard of sanity must be taken to compare it with; but with what do physi- cians generally compare it? With the precise knowledge which they have of the workings of their own minds; with the more vague and general notions which they have of the minds of other sane persons; and with their experience of what they consider insane minds. These are the things they look to; but there is another standard with which they neyer think of comparing it, but with which it is more important to compare it than with all the others put together, and that is, the mind of the supposed lunatic himself, in its natural, habitual state, —that state in which the experience of many years proved him to have been capable of managing himself and his affairs.” The principal object of quoting this case so much at length, is to insist on the importance of the test which it suggests, viz., that of a comparison between the existing and former state of the mind. The medical witnesses are justly censured for having preferred other tests of doubtful value to this sure and certain one. This test also admits of useful application in cases of dementia. The tests of capacity usually recommended in the case of imbeciles s


[70/216 b3303073x_0002_0070.jp2]

250. UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. are obviously insufficient to determine whether or not a man is capa- ble of managing his own property. The arithmetical test, on which authors have laid so much stress, is merely a test of knowledge, not of power. A man may be the best accountant in the world, but he may labour under a moral imbecility, and have so mean a sense of right, so childish a fancy, and so weak a will, that from infancy to age he may yield to-every impulse, and gratify every whim without once counting the cost. In a case that lately came under the author’s notice, the individual owed pence as a child, and pounds as a boy, and added debt to debt with each year that passed over his head, till at length his madness showed itself chiefly by arrangements to spend a year’s income in a week, and the unfounded expectation of an immense fortune on the morrow. He is now the inmate of an asylum, with delusions enough to furnish a dozen madmen. In this case, there was the cultivated and refined intellect of a man with more than the weakness of a child ; but no test could have served to prove him incapable of managing himself and his affairs, save only the history of his life. The criminal acts of persons of weak intellect are characterised by the absence of the motives which actuate sane men; the crimes which they commit are usually as strongly marked by folly as their daily words and actions. They have no other characters, and con- sequently we have no better test. In the case of imbeciles, as in that of maniacs, the law lays down the test of a knowledge of right and wrong. This is as insufficient a test in criminal, as the arithmetical test in civil cases. It is a test of knowledge, and not of power, and the knowledge of right, and the power to do it, are as distinct as science and art. An action presupposes knowledge, motive, and will. What if the motive be insane, and the will incapable of obeying any but the insane impulse? This subject will be presently examined more at length. Of the Characters of Unsoundness of Mind from Excessive Activity of the Faculties. In tracing some of the more prominent characters of mania, it is proposed to use the term in its most extended sense as applied to those cases (and they are the great majority) in which the intellect, the affections, and the passions, are jointly implicated, whether there be a single delusion or several delusions, or merely some one ex- cited emotion or passion, the source of a thousand changing fancies. This inquiry will prepare the way for an examination of the plea of insanity in criminal cases—a subject of great interest and importance. 1. The insane differ from the sane not in having lost any of their faculties, but in exercising them differently—In illustration of this statement the high authority of Lord Erskine may be quoted. On the trial of Hadfield for shooting at the king in Drury Lane Theatre, rh. aa


[71/216 b3303073x_0002_0071.jp2]

CHARACTERS OF MANIA. 250 in 1800, the attorney-general had told the jury, that to protect a per- son from criminal responsibility, there must be a total deprivation of memory and understanding. To this Lord Erskine replied, that if those expressions were meant to be taken in the literal sense of the words, “then no such madness ever existed in the world.” He added “in all the cases which have filled Westminster Hall with the most complicated considerations, the lunatics and other insane persons who have been the subjects of them, have not only had memory iz my sense of the eapression,—they have not only had the most perfect knowledge and recollection of all the relations they stood in towards others, and of the acts and circumstances of their lives, but have, in general, been remarkable for subtlety and acute- ness. Defects in their reasonings have seldom been traceable,—the disease consisting in the delusive sources of thought,—all their de- ductions, within the scope of their malady, being founded on the immoveable assumptions of matters as realities, either without any foundation whatever, or so distorted and disfigured by fancy, as to be nearly the same thing as their creation.” It is scarcely necessary to confirm the statement of so high an authority ; but the following case from Muratori is a very good illustration of the sublety and acuteness which Lord Erskine men- tions as one of the characters of insanity. A jesuit named Sgam- bari, believed himself a cardinal, and claimed to be addressed by the title of eminence. A friend was anxious to convince him of his error, and obtained a patient hearing to his remarks. When he had finished the madman replied, “ Either you consider me insane or rational ; on the latter supposition you do me injustice by your re- monstrances; on the former, I hardly know which is most mad, I for believing myself a cardinal, or you for thinking to cure a mad- man by such reasonings.” The madman, then, reasons like other men, with this difference, that his delusions being stronger than the imaginations of a sane man, and his passions more violent, reason is more readily made the advocate of the one and the slave of the other. The same observa- tions which apply to the reason apply to the other faculties of the mind. The senses are most apt to rebel; but even they are unsuc- cessful in their revolt. The delusion is too strong even for them. 2. The Senses are deceived and confounded. The author of the autobiography already quoted, says, “* My senses were all mocked at and deceived. In reading, my eyes saw words on the paper which, when I looked again, were not. The forms of those around me, and their features, changed even as I looked on them.” “ I heard the voices of invisible agents, and notes so divine, so pure, so holy, that they alone, perhaps, might recompense me for many sufferings. My sense of feeling was not the same; my smell, my taste, gone or con- founded.” The conversion of familiar sounds, such as the lowing of cattle, the falling of water, the grating of a chain, the sound of foot-


[72/216 b3303073x_0002_0072.jp2]

252 -UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. steps, &amp;c., into articulate speech, is not the least remarkable feature of this disorder of the mind. It is scarcely necessary to add, that illusions of sight and hearing are almost universal accompaniments of mania. 3. The persons with whom the madman associates derive their charac- ters from his delusion. In the eye of the author of the autobiography the inmates of the asylum and his keepers were supernatural beings. There was a maniac there whom his spirits called the Lord Jehovah, supremely omnipotent, the trinity in unity; and one of the keepers was supposed by him to be the Saviour of mankind. At other times these same persons assumed other shapes, and according to the state of his mind, were either fiends or angels. His delusion could give to any object any shape it pleased. 4, Eeal impressions on the organs of sense become, as in dreams, the materials of imaginary scenes, This curious phenomenon has already been illustrated at p. 213. 5. The strange antics of the madman are the effects of his delusion. The following passages, quoted from the autobiography so often re- ferred to, will fully establish this proposition : ‘* When alone in the breakfast-room, I expected to be guided to prayer; but a spirit guided me, and placed me in a chair, in a constrained position, with my head turned to look at the clock, the hand of which I saw proceeding to the first quarter; I understood I was to leave the position when it came to the quarter,” &amp;c. p. 41. “* Another delusion I laboured under was, that I should keep my head and heart together, and so serve the Lord, by throwing myself head over heels over every style or gate I came to; the condition here was, as before, on its being done in precision and decision,” p. 125. On one occasion a keeper, in con- sequence of the resistance of one of the patients, throws him down and nearly strangles him. ‘* When I saw his bloated and inflamed cheeks, and the eyes starting out of the sockets, I offered to do any- thing to rescue him. My spirits desired me to whirl myself round and round as fast as I could, which I did till I staggered against the wall, and nearly fell on the stone pavement,” p. 252. This last quo- tation suggests a new corollary, viz. that 6. The acts of the madman, the results of his delusion, are often such as no sane man would believe fitted to compass the object in view. 7. The violence of the madman ts often the effect not of mere passion but of his delusion. “ I knew no malice,” says the author of the auto- biography, “ no vice. I imagined that they (the keepers) loved me, and were all deeply interested in the salvation of my soul, and I imagined, too, that I loved them dearly. Yet I wrestled with the keepers, and offered to do so with others, and struck many hard blows; sometimes, as one informed me, making it difficult for three strong men to control me; yet whenever I did this, 1 was command- ed, that they wished me to do so, to prove my faith and courage, but that they were commanded to prove both till they were satisfied of a


[73/216 b3303073x_0002_0073.jp2]

CHARACTERS OF MANIA. 253 my sincerity,” p. 92. “ It was always a great delight to me to get my hand at liberty, even for a moment, and the first use I usually made of it was to strike the keeper who untied me; directed by my spirits to do so, as the return he desired above all things else, because he knew I was proving my gratitude to the Lord Jehovah at the risk of being struck myself,” p. 107. Doubtless the keepers regarded this as mere senseless and motiveless violence. Do-we not equally misunderstand the criminal acts of the lunatic ? 8. The Maniac, if naturally of a reserved disposition, or when im- pelled by a strong motive, has the power to conceal his delusion. 'The proof of this proposition may be found in every work on insanity. A remarkable illustration of this fact was given by Lord Erskine in his speech in defence of Hadfield. A person who had been confined in a lunatic asylum prosecuted his brother and the keeper of the asylum for imprisonment and false duress: Lord Erskine was counsel for the defence. He was informed in his brief that the man was undoubtedly insane ; but he was not told of the particular form which the malady assumed, The prosecutor was himself a witness in support of the in- dictment ; he was put into the witness-box and examined ; and when Lord Erskine came to cross-examine him, he found his evidence clear, distinct, collected, and rational. He tried to discover some lurking alienation of mind; but during a cross-examination, conducted with all the skill and sagacity of which he was master, for nearly an hour, he was completely foiled: the answers were perfectly rational—there was not the slightest appearance of mental alienation. A gentleman, however, came into court who had been accidentally detained, and whispered in Lord Erskine’s ear that the witness thought he was the Saviour of mankind. Lord Erskine, on receiving the hint, made a low bow to the witness, addressed him in terms of great reverence, respectfully begged to apologise for the unceremonious manner in which he had treated a person of his sacred character, and called him by the name of Christ. The man immediately said, “ Thou hast spoken truly: I am the Christ!” Pinel relates a similar case. A commission was appointed to visit the prison of the Bicétre for the purpose of liberating those persons who were unjustly confined there as being of unsound mind. They examined one particular patient repeatedly upon many successive days; but all their endeavours to prove the man insane failed. They accordingly ordered a certificate to be prepared for his liberation. It was necessary, before the man was _ released, that he should himself sign the certificate. It was placed before him, and he signed “ Jesus Christ.” In a case to which the author has already referred, more than one of the patient’s delu- sions has never, as far as he can ascertain, been mentioned to any one but himself, and those who are most frequently in his company feel that he is insane, but cannot say why they deem him to be so. 9. The acts of the Madman often evince the same forethought and pre- paration as those of the sane.-—This fact is well illustrated by the follow-


[74/216 b3303073x_0002_0074.jp2]

254 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. ing case: A patient who was confined in the Manchester Lunatic Asylum, had been cruelly treated, and in revenge killed the person who had charge of him. He related, with great calmness and self- possession, the particulars of the transaction to Dr. Haslam. He said, “The man whom I stabbed richly deserved it. He behaved to me with great violence and cruelty; he degraded my nature as a human being; he tied me down, hand-cuffed me, and confined my hands much higher than my head, with a leathern thong; he stretched me on the bed of torture; after some days he released me. I gave him warning; for I told his wife I would have justice of him. On her communicating this to him, he came to me in a furious passion, threw me down, dragged me through the court-yard, thumped me on my breast, and confined me in a dark and damp cell. Not liking this situation, I was induced to play the hypocrite. I pretended extreme sorrow for having threatened him, and, by an affectation of repentance, prevailed on him to release me. For several days I paid him great attention, and lent him every assistance. He seemed much pleased with the flattery, and became very friendly in his behaviour towards me. Going one day into the kitchen, where his wife was busied, I saw a knife; this was too great a temptation to be resisted: I con- cealed it about my person, and carried it with me. For some time after- wards, the same friendly intercourse was maintained between us ; but, as he was one day unlocking his garden door, I seized the opportunity, and plunged the knife up to the hilt in his back.”* 10. The Madman, in spite of his proverbial cunning, is easily imposed upon.—This forms the great safeguard of the sane in their dealings with maniacs. A good illustration of this point is contained in Lock- hart’s Life of Sir Walter Scott.+| Henry Weber, Scott’s protégé and amanuensis, had been reproved by him for indulging in habits of intoxi- cation, which injured his health and interfered with his literary pur- suits. On the evening after his return from Edinburgh, the author observed Weber’s eye fixed upon him with an unusual solemnity of expression. On inquiring after his health, Weber rose and said, “ Mr. Scott, you have long insulted me, and I can bear it no longer. I have brought a pair of pistols with me, and must insist on your taking one of them instantly ;”’ and with that he produced the weapons, which had been deposited under his chair, and laid one of them on Scott’s manuscript. “ You are mistaken, I think,” said Scott, “in your way of setting about this affair—but no matter. It can, how- ever, be no part of your object to annoy Mrs. Scott and the children ; therefore, if you please, we will put the pistols into the drawer till after dinner, and then arrange to go out together like gentlemen.” Weber answered with equal coolness, “I believe that will be better,” and laid the second pistol also on the table. Scott locked them both in his desk, and said, “ I am glad you have felt the propriety of what * Haslam on Madness. T Vol. iii. p. 110.


[75/216 b3303073x_0002_0075.jp2]

CHARACTERS OF MANIA. 255 I suggested—let me only request further that nothing may occur while we are at dinner to give my wife any suspicion of what has been passing.” Weber again assented, and Scott withdrew to his dressing- room, from which he immediately despatched a message to one of Weber’s intimate companions. The maniac was secured and placed in confinement. This character of the insane is too familiarly known to require additional illustration. _ 11. The Madman is often conscious of his state, and knows the legal relations in which i places him. —“ An intriguing, unruly, vicious madman was detected with a piece of iron, which he had contrived to shape like a dagger; into this iron he firmly fixed a handle. This weapon was taken away from him. He immediately became exces- sively abusive, and was placed under restraint. After this, he was more violent, and uttered the most revolting imprecations. In a fit of fury, he exclaimed to the keeper, “JU murder you yet: I am a madman, and they cannot hang me for it.” ‘“ When Martin set fire to York Minster, a conversation took place among the inmates of a neighbouring madhouse, relating to the circumstance. The question discussed was, whether Martin would suffer the extreme penalty of the law for the crime. Various were the opinions expressed. In the midst of the conversation, one patient, apparently as mad as the rest, exclaimed, “ He (Martin) will not be hanged—of course he will escape.” ‘* For what reason ?” asked several voices. “* They cannot hang him,” replied the lunatic, ** because he is mad,—he zs one of our- selves/”* It must be remembered that this consciousness of their state occurs in the case of madmen surrounded by madmen ; it is pro- bably absent in those who are at large, so that they are not influenced, in the commission of crimes by that impunity which the law, under certain circumstances, attaches to the criminal acts of the insane. The foregoing are some of the more prominent of those characters of mania which bear on the decision of medico-legal questions. They serve to throw light upon the phenomena of insanity, and to answer some of the arguments which are advanced by persons ignorant of the real nature of this strange condition of mind.-+ ‘To those who are better informed they may be useful by setting forth more clearly than any general description can do, the contradictions of which the madman is the sport. It is probably beyond the power of the sane mind to conceive the confusion which reigns in the mind of the madman. A series of delu- sions, the offspring of some one excited passion or emotion, or one single delusion, the work of fancy, the interpreter of every sensation, the source of every thought, the main-spring of every action ; holding every faculty in stern subjection, making the senses its dupes, the reason its advocate, the fancy its sport, and the will its slave; now * Winslow’s Plea of Insanity in Criminal Cases, pp. 16, 17. ; - For a very able exposition of some of the characters of mania see Aber- crombie on the Intellectual Powers, 9th edition, pp. 315 and 326.


[76/216 b3303073x_0002_0076.jp2]

255. UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. whispering in the ear things unspoken, now painting on the eye things unseen ; changing human beings at will into fiends or angels ; convert- ing every sensation into a vision, every sound into articulate speech ; the unreal world within in constant conflict with the real world with- out; understood of no one, yet believing himself to be comprehended by all; punished for the very actions which he supposes his tyrants to have commanded, controlled in everything which he thinks it his duty to perform. There is no wish however presumptuous, no fancy how- ever monstrous, no action however absurd, no crime however heinous, that his delusion cannot create, prompt, and justify. That a sane man might form a conception, however faint, of the distraction of such a state as this, it would be necessary to combine into one whole the strange confusion of a dream, and the sleeper’s entire belief in its reality, the varying impressions and changing scenes of his waking hours, and the conduct, to him wholly unintelligible, of those about him. The degree of confusion existing in the mind of the madman will of course vary with the nature and extent of his delusion. When several delusions spring from one excited emotion or passion, such as pride or vanity, the distraction may be expected to he greater than when one single delusion takes possession of the mind. But in this latter case, though the confusion will be less, and there may be many and long intervals of apparent sanity, the mind will be as abject a slave to the one delusion as to the many; all his thoughts will be modified by it, and all his actions will be dictated by it. He will be a slave to one instead of to many tyrants, but still a slave. A little consideration will convince us that, for legal purposes, it sig- nifies little whether the mind is possessed by one delusion or by many, for the reasons which apply in the one case will hold good in the other. When any particular act of the insane is the subject of examination, the same remark will hold good; for that one act, if the result of delu- sion at all, must, m the very nature of things, be dictated by one delusion—one of the many, or the only one. In approaching the medico-legal questions relating to the form of mental unsoundness now under consideration (mental unsoundness with undue activity of the faculties), we encounter one of the strangest anomalies which the statute-book presents. In civil cases, if a man can be shown “to be non compos mentis, the law avoids his act, though it cannot be traced to, or connected with, the morbid imagina- tion which constitutes his disease, and which may be extremely partial in its influence upon conduct.”* This rule is very simple, and, if it err at all, it is on the side of safety. But in criminal cases, according to the highest and best legal authorities, it is not enough to prove a man zon compos; but it must be shown that at the time he committed the act he did not know right from wrong. This is the * Lord Erskine in his defence of Hadfield.


[77/216 b3303073x_0002_0077.jp2]

PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 257. received doctrine; but, as will be presently shown, the knowledge of right and wrong is not the only test which has been laid down. Now it is submitted that if the law in civil cases be right, the law in crimi- nal cases must be wrong. If it be just to deprive a man of the ma- nagement of his property on account of a delusion which has no im- mediate connexion with the affairs of business, ought not the same delusion which renders him incapable of civil acts, to render him also incapable of crimes? Does his delusion eclipse only half his mind ? Has it not been abundantly shown that the madman’s acts are as much the offspring of his delusion as his thoughts? Do not the same faculties concur in civil as in criminal acts? Is there not in both some wish or emotion or passion to originate the act, reason to plan it, and will to execute it? What ground is there for supposing that the hand which holds a pen is not moved by the same delusion with that which grasps a dagger? The civil acts of a madman are not void on account of the direct effect of his delusion upon them, but because there is no security that the influence of the delusion may not at any moment extend beyond its usual sphere of action. It is just so with his criminal acts. There can be no certainty that the delusion which ordinarily affects only the intellect, or shows itself in harmless pecu- harities of conduct will not lead to acts of atrocious violence. This distinction between civil and criminal cases has naturally arisen out of the high value which the law attaches to human life. It doubt- less seems reasonable to accord to life a higher protection than to property, by applying to the criminal acts of the madman a more rigid test than to his civil acts. It is but natural that the law should have a misgiving as to the effect of allowing the proof of delusion to acquit a man of so heinous a crime as that of murder. The importance which this subject has recently assumed will justify a somewhat lengthened examination of it. The plea of Insanity in criminal cases.—It has been just stated, that the received test of responsibility for criminal acts is the power of dis- tinguishing, at the very time at which the act was done, right from wrong. Such is the received legal theory; but this theory has not always been carried out in our courts of law. Our earliest legal au- thorities evidently knew nothing of insanity beyond its violence, for we find them defining a madman as one who “ does not understand what he is doing, and, wanting mind and reason, differs little from brutes.”* The attorney-general, on the trial of Hadfield, evidently took this view of madness, when he laid down the law, “ that to pro- tect a man from criminal responsibility there must be a total depriva- tion of memory and understanding,” and this Lord Erskine, in his defence, admits to be “ the very expression used both by Lord Coke and by Lord Hale.” This totu/ insanity Lord Hale was the first to dis- tinguish from partial insanity, and he first laid down the principle, that partial insanity is no excuse in the commission of any capital * Bracton, lib. v.


[78/216 b3303073x_0002_0078.jp2]

258 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. offence. The same authority suggests as a measure of responsi- bility, “that such a person as, labouring under melancholy dis- tempers, hath yet as great understanding as ordinarily a child of fourteen years hath, is such a person as can be guilty of treason and felony.” The practice of our courts of law was for a long time in strict conformity with the principle thus laid down by Lord Hale. Thus, Mr. Justice Tracy, in the trial of Arnold in 1723, for shooting at Lord Onslow, observed, “ it is not every kind of frantic humour, or something unaccountable in a man’s actions, that points him out to be such a madman, as is exempted from punishment: it must be a man that is totally deprived of his understanding and memory, and doth not know what he is doing, no more than an infant, than a brute, or a wild beast, such a one is never the object of punishment.” The trial of Hadfield, in the year 1800, gave the death-blow to the doctrines of Lord Hale. On this memorable occasion Lord Erskine, in conducting the defence, brought his extraordinary talents to bear on the subject of insanity, and with a felicity of expression peculiarly his own, distinguished some of its more marked forms from each other, and established delusion as the true test of intellectual insanity. He showed that what the law had styled madness was idiocy—the idiocy @ nativitate vel dementia naturalis, of Lord Hale himself—and that no such madness as that imagined by the older writers had “ ever existed in the world.” According to this great authority, “ Delusion, when there is no frenzy or raving madness, is the true character of insanity,’ and, in order to render the madman irresponsible for crime, it must be shown, “ that the act in question was the immediate un- qualified offspring of the disease.” The doctrines of Lord Erskine, though always quoted with appro- bation were soon lost sight of, and in place of the test of delusion, sprang up that of “right and wrong.” Thus, in the case of Belling- ham tried at the Old Bailey for the murder of Mr. Perceval, May 15, 1812, Mansfield, C. J., is reported to have told the Jury, that they must be satisfied, in order to acquit, that the prisoner was incapable of judging between right and wrong, and that at the time of commit- ting the atrocious act with which he stood charged, he did not consider that murder was a crime against the laws of God and Nature. Ina case which occurred only two months later (that of Bowler for shooting Mr. Burrowes), Mr. Justice Le Blanc left it to the Jury to determine whether the prisoner, when he committed the offence, was incapable of distinguishing between right and wrong, or whether he was under any illusion in respect to the person he shot, which rendered his mind at the time insensible to the nature of the act he was about to commit ; since in that case he would not be legally responsible for his conduct. In a still more recent case,* Lord Lyndhurst told the jury to acquit, if they were satisfied that the prisoner did not consider his act any * Rex v. Offord, 5 C. and P. Reports, 168.


[79/216 b3303073x_0002_0079.jp2]

PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 259 crime against the laws of God and Nature. A similar principle with slight and unimportant verbal variations was affirmed in the trial of Oxford for firing at the Queen, in the recent case of M‘Naughton, in the able exposition of the law by the lord chancellor before the house of Lords, by the law lords who spoke on that occasion, and lastly, by all the judges to whom this grave question was referred. There can be no doubt, then, that the legal test at present received is the power of distinguishing right from wrong. This is the legal theory, but what is the legal practice? In the case of Hadfield, already referred to, Lord Kenyon, who with the rest of the judges of the queen’s bench, presided, interrupted the defence, and said, “ Mr. Attorney- General, can you call any witnesses to controvert these facts? With regard to the law, as it has been laid down, there can be no doubt whatever. If a man be ina deranged state of mind at the time of committing an act, he is not criminally answerable; the material part of the case is whether, at the very time, his mind was sane.” And after other observations, his Lordship said, ‘‘ His insanity must be made out to the satisfaction of a moral man meeting the case with fortitude of mind, and knowing the anxious duty he has to discharge ; yet if the scales hang tremulously, throw in a certain proportion of mercy in favour of the prisoner.”* In this case the distinction be- tween right and wrong is altogether lost sight of, and in its place we have the more simple question of the insanity of the accused, in the sense which Lord Erskine had attached to that term, made the’ turning point of the verdict. As a general rule, however, the theory and the practice of the law have been consistent, that is to say, though the verdict has been couched in general terms, the question of right and wrong has been distinctly submitted to the jury. In the case of M‘Naughton, for instance, the verdict was, “ not guilty, on the ground of insanity,” which verdict followed without: hesitation the charge of Chief Justice Tindal, in which he had strongly and clearly laid down the distinction of right and wrong. * Speech of Lord Lyndhurst in the House of Lords. t In this place it may be useful to subjoin the answers of the fifteen judges to the questions suggested by the trial of M‘Naughton, submitted by them to the House of Lords, and read in the name of all the judges except one (Mr. Justice Maule) by Lord Chief Justice Tindal, on the 19th of June, 1843. Question I, What is the law respecting alleged crimes committed by persons afflicted with insane delusion, in respect of one or more particular subjects or persons: as, for instance, when at the time of the commission of the alleged crime the accused knew he was acting contrary to law, but did the act com- plained of with the view, under the influence of some insane delusion, of redressing or avenging some supposed grievance or injury, or of producing some supposed public benefit ?—Answer. The opinion of the judges was, that, notwithstunding the party committed a wrong act, while labouring under the idea that he was redressing a supposed grievanee or injury, or under the ims pression of obtaining some public or private benefit, he was liable to punish- ment. Question II. What are the proper questions to be submitted to the jury, when a person alleged to be affected with insane delusion, respecting one or


[80/216 b3303073x_0002_0080.jp2]

260 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. According to some high legal authorities the words right and wrong are synonymous with lawful and unlawful; and the fifteen judges seem to be of this opinion, for they say, “Every person was supposed to know what the law was, and therefore nothing could justify a wrong act except it was clearly proved that the party did not know right from wrong.” As, however, the words right and wrong have frequently been used in a moral and religious sense, and the words just quoted are not sufficiently explicit as to their true meaning to place that meaning beyond the reach of doubt, it may be well to assume in the first place, that these words do mean something more than lawful and unlawful, and to inquire how far, when taken in a higher sense, the power of distinguishing between right and wrong can be used as a test of responsibility. There is no doubt that this test has a show of reason, for the mind of the accused party must be either capable or incapable of distinguish- ing between right and wrong. But the real question is not whether more particular subjects or persons, is charged with the commission of a crime, murder for example, and insanity is set up as a defence ?—Answer, The jury ought in all cases to be told that every man should be considered of sane mind until the contrary were clearly proved in evidence. That before a plea of in- sanity should be allowed, undoubted evidence ought to be adduced, that the accused was of diseased mind, and that at the time he committed the act he was not conscious of right and wrong. This opinion related to every case in which a party was charged with an illegal act, and a plea of insanity was set up. Every person was supposed to know what the law was, and therefore nothing could justify a wrong act except it was clearly proved that the party did not know right from wrong. If that was not satisfactorily proved, the accused was hable to punishment; and it was the duty of the judge so to tell the jury when summing up the evidence, accompanied by those remarks and observa- tions which the nature and peculiarities of each case might suggest and require. Question III. In what terms ought the question to be left to the jury as to the prisoner’s state of mind at the time when the act was committed? No answer. Question IV. If a person, under an insane delusion as to existing facts, com- mits an offence in consequence thereof, is he hereby excused ?—Answer. If the delusion were only partial, the party accused was equally liable with a person of sane mind. If the accused killed another in self-defence, he would be en- titled to an acquittal, but if the crime were committed for any supposed injury, he would then be liable to the punishment awarded by the laws to his crime. Question V. Can a medical man, conversant with the disease of insanity, who never saw the prisoner previously to the trial, but who was present during the whole trial and the examination of all the witnesses, be asked his opiniun as to the state of the prisoner’s mind at the time of the commission of the alleged crime, or his opinion whether the prisoner was conscious, at the time of doing the act, that he was acting contrary to law? or whether he was labouring under any, and what delusion at the time ?—Answer. The question could not be put in the precise form stated above, for by doing so it would be assumed that the facts had been proved. When the facts were proved and admitted, then the question as one of science would be generally put to a witness under the cir- » cumstances stated in the interrogatory. Mr. Justice Maule dissented from this last question. In his opinion such questions might be at once put to medical men without reference to the facts proved; and he considered that this had been done, and the legality of the practice thereby confirmed on the trial of M‘Naughton.


[81/216 b3303073x_0002_0081.jp2]

PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES, 261 the test is reasonable in the abstract, but whether it is practical. There is one simple objection to it, and that is, that it never has been, never will be, and never can be, fairly applied. Medical witnesses may express, in general terms, their opinion that a man is irrespon- sible ; judges, in their charges to the jury, may insist upon the distince- tion; and the jury may, without hesitation, return a verdict of guilty or of acquittal on the ground of insanity ; but not one of them will dare to grapple with the naked question of right and wrong ; not one of them will be really guilty of such presumption. The author will retract this strong opinion when he shall meet with an honest and reasonable man who will affirm that he is ready to solve this question, Till then, he will believe it to be possible with one Being alone. If, on the other hand, the words right and wrong be taken to mean lawful and unlawful, the question is brought within very narrow limits ; for the law assumes, that every member of society knows what the law is. Insanity, therefore, in order to make a man irresponsible, must, in some way or other, rob him of this knowledge. Now, it is clear that it does not always do this, for cases are on record in which madmen have committed murder that they might suffer the penalty of the law; and, as has been already stated, those who, from being placed under restraint, have grown conscious of their infirmity, know or believe that they are by that infirmity rendered irresponsible. On the other hand, it seems to the last degree improbable that mad- men, who suffer from what is usually termed monomania, and whose intellects appear to be so little affected that they are allowed to mingle in society like other men, should be ignorant of a law with which from their earliest years they have been familiar, and of which we are all, unfortunately, too often reminded. The knowledge and con- sciousness of this law may be fairly expected to be the very last of which madness would deprive a man ; and if a mere abstract know- ledge of the law is all that is required to render a man _ responsible, then most madmen are responsible. But is this knowledge really all which requires to be taken into consideration? Is the case of the unhappy maniac under the accusation of crime to be the only one in which the law allows of no plea in mitigation? Is not delusion such a plea? Can any plea be stronger? It would be strange, indeed, if that which exercises so absolute a sway over every sense, and every faculty, which has the power at any moment to transport a man into an unreal world, to surround him with unreal things, and to perplex him with more than a dream’s confusion, should not be allowed to have any effect upon his actions. It must have some effect. The law cannot be guilty of so great and glaring an inconsistency as to allow the proof of delusion, which is the proof of one form of madness, to . vacate a man’s civil acts, and yet to have no effect whatever upon his criminal acts ; and yet of such an inconsistency it must be guilty, so long as the point upon which the whole question of responsibility turns, is the consciousness that the act is contrary to law.


[82/216 b3303073x_0002_0082.jp2]

262 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. There is one form of delusion which must form an exception to this simple rule, and that is, where a man kills another, imagining him to be a bird, a beast, or a fiend. There is also another obvious exception, and that is where a man’s delusion is such as to produce an honest convic- tion in his mind of his being above the law ; as when he believes him- self the Deity, or commissioned by him to fulfil some mission of wrath or extirpation. As a general rule, perhaps, it may be asserted that, when the delusion is of a religious character, we can never confidently affirm that the criminal act was not the natural consequence of a delusion, which placed the madman in his own sincere conviction beyond and above the operation of human laws. These, it may be said, are ex- ceptional cases. Exactly so. They are used as exceptional cases ; but they invalidate your legal rule, and they are urged to show, that this apparently simple rule is, in some points at least, inapplicable ; and that the nature of a man’s delusion must be taken into the account. There is another class of cases in which the law must extend its inquiries beyond the simple test of right and wrong, and that is, where the criminal act is the natural consequence of the delusion, as in the cases of Hadfield and M‘Naughton. This class of cases may serve to bring the question of the sufficiency of the legal test to an issue. To do this, the surest way is to take the strongest argument which can be advanced against the acquittal of the prisoner. That argument stands thus: A man believes himself to have been injured by another, and he takes away his life. Suppose the injury real instead of imaginary, would not the man be responsible for his act? Undoubtedly he would. This argument would be valid if all the concomitants in the two cases were the same ; but, in reality, they have nothing in common but the act itself. The imaginary offence has imaginary accompaniments, and every thought connected with it is one of confusion. To suppose that the mind which can imagine an impossible offence is as sound in all other respects as that of sane men, is contrary to the strong conviction of every author of experience who has written on the subject. They all with one con- sent repudiate the notion of a monomania consisting in a single delu- sion, which leaves the mind sound, and free to act as it will, beyond the sphere of its influence. The more closely the so-called mono- maniac 1s observed, the more extensive is found to be the disorder of his mind. Those actions which are not directly prompted by his de- Jusion are more strange, and his passions are more excitable than those of others. If his insane idea have its source in the imagination, how | unlikely that this will be the only morbid display which his fancy makes! If it flow from passion, how improbable that the one passion by which it was suggested should be the only one disordered! The theory of a single insane idea springing up in the mind, unaccompanied by any other disordered action of the faculty from which it takes its rise, having no effect upon the remaining faculties, and showing itself simply by prompting an action, which, when once suggested, is carried


[83/216 b3303073x_0002_0083.jp2]

PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES, 263 out with the complete consciousness of its real nature which exists in the mind of a sane man acting under the suggestion of a correspond- ing reality, is too absurd to be for one moment entertained. In this case then, as in those already supposed, it will be impossible to limit the inquiry to the assumed test ; the court must be led into a con- sideration of the general condition of the mind of the accused, must receive evidence concerning it from medical men, and. must, whether it will or not, have the question decided upon different grounds from those which the law has laid down. Nor will the fact that the murderer prepared and concealed a weapon, and watched his opportunity, be alleged by any reasonable man as a ground for inferring his sanity. Why the merest imbecile knows that a knife or a pistol is a common instrument of death ; weak as his mind may be, he conceals his weapon not because he is conscious of guilt, but because he knows that the action he con- templates would be prevented if it were openly displayed ; and, as has been shown, a maniac exhibits even more cunning than a man of sound mind, and the thing which he has conceived in madness, he exe- cutes by the same means and with the same precautions as the sane. But there is another case which presents still greater difficulties. A man receives a real injury, and he avenges himself. It is alleged that he was not of sound mind when he committed the act, and that his act was the result of insanity, inasmuch as the injury was by his insane mind magnified to an undue importance, and then acted upon just as if it had been altogether imaginary. In this case will the law refuse all inquiry into the alleged condition of that man’s mind ? and, if not, what becomes of the simple test of right and wrong? Such cases as these are not of rare occurrence in lunatic asylums. Are their inmates punished as murderers? If not, how will it be possible to refuse all inquiry as to the state of mind of one, not actually under confinement, but still asserted to be as mad as if he were an inmate of an asylum? In these cases, too, an inquiry into the state of mind, extending much beyond the legal test, will be ne- cessary, and cannot be refused ; and this very inquiry, once granted, must result in showing the insufficiency of the test. Even in those cases where the criminal act cannot be traced to any delusion of which it is the legitimate offspring, but it is simply alleged in defence, that the party is of unsound mind, will the jury, on the proof of such un- soundness, consent to treat the madman as if he were sane? Will the court refuse to regard this as a plea in mitigation ? It may be said, in answer to these arguments, that the court never has refused to entertain the general question of the mind’s soundness or unsoundness, but that it institutes the inquiry for the express pur- pose of ascertaining whether the madman really knows that his act is forbidden by law, whether at the very time at which he did the act he was conscious that it was unlawful. If this be so, why does not the court direct the jury to state in so many words, that the accused,


[84/216 b3303073x_0002_0084.jp2]

264 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. at the time of committing the act, was in such a state of mind that he did not know it to be an unlawful one? The answer is obvious. The jury could not decide such a question: they could not apply such a test. The test is as unmanageable as the power of dis- tinguishing right from wrong. We ourselves believe that, as a ge- neral rule, the madman knows the act he contemplates to be forbidden ; but we should hesitate much and long before we consented to embody such an’ opinion in a verdict. The very horror felt at the atrocious act which has been committed, the very earnestness with which we invoke the punishment of murder on the murderer, makes the mind recoil from the thought of committing that worst of all murders—a judicial murder. It is possible that the madman might have acted under an ignorance of the law ; it is certain that his motives are not in all re- spects such as actuate a man of sound mind ; it is in the highest degree improbable that his mind, beyond the sphere of his delusion, thinks, feels, and acts, with the clearness, the force, and the freedom of the sane. Another test has been recently proposed by an able writer in the British and Foreign Medical Review,* viz. “ whether or not the indi- vidual had at the time any power of controul over his actions.” It is somewhat strange that such a test as this should have been proposed in the very paragraph in which all the legal tests are rejected on the ground “that they do not answer the purpose intended.” It is strange that the writer should not have perceived that in shifting the test from the intellect to the will—from the knowledge of right to the more easy to ascertain a man’s abstract knowledge of right and wrong, lawful and unlawful, than the exact amount of self-restraint which he possesses? A man must either know, or not know, that his action is right or lawful, and he must be able, or not able, to controul himself ; but who will be bold enough to determine, in any particular case, which alternative is the true one? And what shall be his means of judging? Is his preparation for the act to prove his power of control- ling himself in regard to the act itself? Ifa madman thinks another a fiend, or believes that the Deity has-commissioned him to take away his life, will he not load a pistol, watch his opportunity, and act in many respects as a sane man would do? And, if prevented on one occasion, will he not wait for a more favourable one? The fact is, that in proposing this test, as in the general discussion of this ques- tion, two distinct things have been confounded,—the act itself, which is the result of the delusion, and the mode of accomplishing it.. It is the delusion which distinguishes the madman from the sane, and not the mode in which the delusive impulse is carried into effect. This test, then, appears to be open to the same objections which lie against the legal tests: it seems reasonable, but it is not practical. The entire argument, then, is anargumentum ad ignorantiam. It is because we know not what may be, that we do not pretend to say No. 31, p. 108.


[85/216 b3303073x_0002_0085.jp2]

PLEA OF INSANITY IN CRIMINAL CASES. 265 what is; we have a horror of murder and the murderer ; we should recoil, therefore, from the very thought of a judicial murder; we think that broad lines of distinction are to be preferred to subtile refine- ments; that it is better that punishment should be certain than se- vere; and we therefore conclude, that the law of France “Il n’y a ni crime ni délit lorsque le prévenu était en état de démence au temps de l’action” ought to be the law of England. It may be objected that under such a law, even if the most rigid proof of insanity were required, many men would escape who ought to suffer the punishment of death: undoubtedly they would ; but, on the other hand, none who did not deserve death would be executed ; and it is a generally acknowledged principle, that it is better that many guilty persons should escape than that one innocent man should suffer. In this case, moreover, a verdict of acquittal, on the ground of insanity, brings with it, as a necessary consequence, confinement for life, which, were it inflicted as a punishment, would be second in severity only to death itself. There are some who argue that to confine the insane for life is an injustice, inasmuch as the disease under which they labour may be completely cured. It is an injustice towards the individual, but the step is demanded by a regard to the public safety; and, when all the alternatives are weighed, it will be found to be the least injustice that the case allows of. The practical question is this: What amount of injustice are we willing to inflict on the individual in order that society at large may be protected? Ifthe public safety requires that the homicidal maniac should be put to death, let the principle be boldly proclaimed and acted on; but if, on the other hand, this seems too great a sacrifice, and too glaring an injustice, we must be content to confine him for life, to prevent the possibility of future mischief. This degree of in- justice to the individual, a regard to the public safety will justify. Nor is there any good reason to fear that, by exempting the mad- man from the punishment of death, we shall weaken the hold which the law has on the man of sound mind; for, in order that he may es- cape death, he must successfully feign insanity—a task of no ordinary difficulty—and, if he succeed, a perpetual sacrifice of liberty awaits him. It is not likely, therefore, that society will suffer any injury from the adoption of the course here advocated ; and we may perhaps find that it gains something by openly attributing to disease some of the most revolting crimes which degrade and debase our common nature. In respect to the responsibility of madmen, then, the law seems to be in this dilemma :—it must either insist upon a test which it is im- possible to apply, or it must uniformly refuse or admit the plea of insanity. If it hold to a test, its decisions will want that uniformity which ought to belong to then, and their soundness will be constantly liable to be called in question ; if it reject the plea of insanity, it ought forthwith to do away with all other pleas in mitigation. en


[86/216 b3303073x_0002_0086.jp2]

266 UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. This question has already been discussed at great length, but the author cannot quit it without adding a few words as to the important object of prevention. There are doubtless many persons living at large in society, or under the insufficient control of parents or relations, and known to harbour delusions naturally tending to acts of violence ; and there are others whose delusions tend less directly to criminal acts, but who are subject to sudden and dangerous bursts of passion disproportioned to their cause. Might not the natural guardians of such persons, or those who have assumed the control over them, be required to submit their cases to a competent tribunal, which should decide on the necessity and extent of restraint? And further, in case of an injury being committed by such persons, might not the sufferer or those legally dependent upon him for their support, be al- lowed to recover damages in an action at law against their natural guar- dians, on proof that they were fully cognizant of the state of the accused, and had neglected to resort to this tribunal, or had not obeyed its orders? Such an enactment might, it is conceived, be even ex- tended to the overseers and guardians of the poor: but very many cases, among all classes of society, must still remain beyond the reach of any precautionary measure. If such a tribunal were established, its investigations should be conducted at the public expense, or at the least possible cost to the parties resorting to it; its proceedings should be unfettered by technicalities, and it should be presided over by men practically conversant with the insane, who might discharge the ad- ditional duty of ascertaining the state of mind of those accused of crime —a duty for which a common jury is totally unfit. The removal of the insane as much as possible from the eye of the curious, and the avoidance of all unnecessary notoriety, are public duties so obvious that they need not be insisted on in this place. The foregoing observations apply to those cases only in which dis- tinct proof has been obtained of unsoundness of mind, existing pre- viously, as well as at the very time of the criminal act, and not to that instinctive madness which is altogether independent of the intellect, and consists merely in uncontrollable impulse. This form of mad- ness is now generally recognized by medical men, and has on more than one occasion led to the acquittal of an accused party. The criminal acts committed under its influence have most or all of the following characters :-— They are without discoverable motive, or in opposition to all known motives. A man kills his wife to whom he is tenderly attached, a brother his sister, a mother her infant; or the victim is one whom tlie madman never saw before in the course of his life, and against whom it is impossible that he can bear any malice. After the commission of the act, he does not seek to escape ; he often publishes what he has done ; does not conceal the body from view, but openly exposes it ; delivers himself up to justice; describes the state of mind which led to the act, and either remains stupid and indifferent, or is overwhelmed


[87/216 b3303073x_0002_0087.jp2]

UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. 267 by remorse. He has no accomplices ; in most instances he has made no preparations, and he takes nothing from his victim. Sometimes he has previously spoken of his strong temptation, and begged to be prevented from doing mischief. These homicidal acts are generally preceded by a striking change of conduct and character, and, on in- quiry, the unhappy maniac is often found to-have an hereditary ten- dency to insanity, to have attempted suicide, to have expressed a wish for death, or to be executed as a criminal. As a knowledge of the existence of such cases as these, and of the irresponsibility which would probably attach to them, might act as an encouragement to real criminals, it is most important that all the cir- cumstances of the case should be duly weighed, and that careful search should be made after those motives which most frequently actuate the criminal. It is in such difficult cases, too, that a caution is espe- cially necessary against basing a decision upon one or two alleged characteristics. All the circumstances of the act ought to be duly weighed, in the spirit of the words of Lord Hale: “lest, on the one side, there be a kind of inhumanity towards the defects of human nature, or, on the other side, too great an indulgence given to great crimes.” It will be seen that this class of cases stands quite apart from those in which we can obtain evidence of insanity previous to the homicidal act, and altogether independent of it. Indeed, it admits of doubt whether the mere act itself ought to be admitted in a court of law as evidence of insanity; but the circumstances of the case might justify the court in recommending the prisoner to mercy. There is no room for prevention in these cases, except it consist in rendering the idea of violent death as little familiar as possible, and in discouraging to the utmost those revolting details which fill the columns of our papers, and often prove suggestive of crime. This pre- caution must be left to public opinion, which will grow stronger and stronger as the dangers and inconveniences of indiscriminate publicity shall make themselves felt, and the truth become more securely esta- blished, that what we wish men not to do we should not talk about. This instinctive madness is no doubt sometimes associated with delusion, the criminal act itself being the result of the strong excite- ment of the passions, while the delusion suggests the motive. To this class probably belong those cases of wholesale murder in which the father of a family destroys his wife and children, to prevent them from falling victims to starvation, and then puts an end to his own life: the idea that such an evil threatens them being insane, no less than the impulse which prompts such a mode of escape.* * In all discussions concerning the criminal responsibility of persons of un- sound mind, it is necessary carefully to distinguish the several conditions of mind from each other. An imbecile has a confused and imperfect notion of crimes, laws, and punishments; and his acts are as foolish as his thoughts. The cases of John Barclay (p. 228) and William Tillard (p. 226) are instances of


[88/216 b3303073x_0002_0088.jp2]

268 FEIGNED UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. Men feign insanity from the same motives which lead to the simulation of other diseases. The same observation, too, applies to this class of feigned diseases as to those already noticed at greater length, that it is only by actual experience of the real disease that the counterfeit can be detected. Indeed, this remark is generally ac- knowledged to be peculiarly applicable to feigned insanity, as no dis- tinction which the medical man is called upon to make demands so great a share of experience. Zacchias tells us, that there is no disease more easily feigned or more difficult of detection; it may be added, that there is no point in which writers of fiction have more generally failed than in their descriptions of insanity; and it is this general ignorance of its phenomena which leads to such marked failures in assuming it. Idiocy.—This form of mental unsoundness is rarely assumed, and, when feigned, is easy of detection. The idiot has aways a peculiar form of head, accompanied in most instances by other deformities. It must always be practicable to learn so much of a man’s history as, that he was not always in the condition which he has assumed. Imbecility.—In this case, too, the history, where it can be obtained, will serve to unmask the imposition. In the few cases in which his previous history is unknown, the patient’s account of himself may assist us in detecting the imposition, for he may assign his unsound- ness to some inadequate cause. The peculiar cast of countenance of the imbecile is extremely difficult to imitate. The dull, stupid, vacant, and wandering look, so characteristic of this state ; the strange want of connexion in the ideas, the submissive and pusillanimous behaviour, with sudden and transient gusts of passion, are very difficult to as- sume. In the less strongly marked forms of imbecility, shrewdness and stupidity are displayed as it were indifferently on all points ; but in an assumed case the impostor is shrewd on all points involving his interest or the success of his scheme, and displays his stupidity only in mattérs of indifference. All his conversation tends to exculpate himself ; that of the real imbecile, on the contrary, tends to criminate himself. Ray lays much stress on this means of discrimination.* crimes committed by this class. A monomaniac fancies himself an object of persecution, and he murders one of his imaginary tormentors. His act is as mad as his thought. He destroys one of his supposed enemies, and hopes thereby to rid himself of all. Such was M‘Naughton. Another man haying betrayed decided symptoms of madness, receives a real injury, and murders the person who has injured him. Such was Lord Ferrers. A third, oppressed with melancholy fears, kills those to whom he is most attached, to save them from some imaginary fate. Such was the female already referred to, who, under the fear of starvation arismg out of temporary difficulties, murdered her child, cooked it, eat of it, and offered the dish to her husband. Lastly, we have the so-called instinctive madness, of which a good example is given at page 244 in the case of William Brown. Much of the difference of opinion which has been displayed in the recent discussions has doubtless arisen from not sufiiciently distinguishing these several forms of unsoundness. * Op. cit. p. 240.


[89/216 b3303073x_0002_0089.jp2]

FEIGNED MANIA. 269 Dementia.—This form of unsoundness, like the two former, is neither frequently nor easily assumed. In attempting an imitation, the impostor generally indulges in hallucinations and gives evidence of mental excitement, in place of that torpor of all the faculties which belongs to the true disease. Mania.—lIt is more easy to assume the violence of mania than the more subdued characters of the foregoing forms of unsoundness ; hence it is more frequently assumed. The distinction of the feigned from the true disease, though occasionally requiring time and continued obser- vation, is not difficult; but in this, as in other feigned diseases, the impostor often obstinately resists the efforts of the medical man to obtain a confession of his fraud. The description of mania already given will assist us in our diagnosis. The peculiar expression of the countenance, the marked alteration of the features, and the wildness of the eye, which be- long to real mania, can scarcely be successfully assumed. The vio- lent excitement, accompanied by peculiar convulsive movements, also scarcely admits of imitation, and cannot be supported for any length of time. The real maniac will continue without sleep for days, and even weeks, or, if he sleep at all, his rest will be disturbed and agitated ; but the impostor can scarcely keep himself awake beyond one or two days, and, in spite of himself, sound sleep will come upon him. A dose of opium, too, which would produce no effect whatever upon the madman, would infallibly send the impostor to sleep. The same remark applies to all other remedies, the real maniac being remarkably insensible to their action, so that a gentle emetic or purgative may be successfully used as a test. Another character of true mania is insensibility to external impressions. The madman will bear the most intense cold, and gaze without being dazzled on the strong light of the sun. There is, at the same time, a corresponding insensibility to internal impressions, as hunger and thirst, and the madman will go without food for days together with impunity. The bowels are also unusually inactive. Other symptoms of less impor- tance have been much insisted on. The temperature of the skin, with the exception of that of the head, is usually lower than natural; the patient gives out a peculiar odour,* and the pulse is stated to be more frequent. * This odour, by some authors, has been considered as evidence of existing mania. It is doubtless a symptom of some importance, but I have myself ob- served it in a most marked degree in one who had been some time convalescent from an acute attack of the disease. It is best perceived in the patient’s bed- room of a morning, and is so marked as to be observed even by servants. It closely resembles the smell of a corpse. + More stress has been laid upon this symptom than it deserves; and Dr. Rush, chiefly on the strength of an increased frequency of pulse, is asserted to have decided on the insanity of a criminal supposed to be feigning madness. As it is important to guard against errors in diagnosis, it will be useful to con- trast the observations made by Leuret and Mitivié at La Salpétriére on the pulses of insane females with those of the author on the pulses of healthy persons of


[90/216 b3303073x_0002_0090.jp2]

0k a UNSOUNDNESS OF MIND. Such are the chief physical symptoms of mania, which may assist us in distinguishing the true from the feigned disorder. Those which belong more especially to the mind and its manifestations are the fol- lowing: The impostor is apt to overact his part during such times as he is‘watched ; instead of becoming more quiet and reserved on the approach of the physician, his violence increases ; he assumes a total annihilation of reason instead of that perversion of it which is so cha- racteristic of the real affection ; he obtrudes instead of concealing his thoughts ; pretends a defect of memory which does not belong to real insanity ; he has not the method of true madness, nor does he recur constantly to the leading idea; he betrays some hesitation in the midst of his assumed violence; he has not the steady gaze of the madman, and cannot resist the inquiring glance of the physician ; his fits occur suddenly and at irregular and convenient intervals, instead of having the periodicity of intermittent attacks of mania. The first attack of his disorder is sudden, instead of having the long period of incubation so general in true mania. The perversion of the moral feelings which causes the madman to dislike every person to whom he was previously attached, being a symptom little known to the vulgar, is not assumed by the impostor. the same sex. As it is probable that these observations on the msane were made in the erect posture, the frequency of the pulses of healthy females in that as well as in the sitting posture is given in the subjoined table. The results of both series of observations are expressed in percentage proportions of the whole number of observations. Those of Leuret and Mitivié amount to 89, those of the author to 50. Author’s Observations. Leuret and E Mitivié. Standing. Sitting. Above 100 8 per cent. 30 per cent. 12 per cent. 90 to 99 il ” 12 29 18 ” 80 to 89 Ne as Sane oO ee 70 to 79 33 55 22 ” 32s, 60 to 69 a 1s 142ouRe Under 60 I pg (Ove eee A vis From this table it results, that in healthy females there are 42 cases per cent. in the erect and 30 per cent. in the sitting posture in which the pulse exceeds 90, whilst in insane females the number above 90 does not exceed 19 per cent. It is only between 80 and 90 that there is any great excess on the side of the insane. This increased frequency of pulse has, therefore, been unjustly considered as diagnostic of mania. There can be no doubt that during the paroxysms the violent exertion of the muscles must tend to raise the pulse con- siderably above the healthy standard; but the same effect would follow the same amount of exertion in the sane. Some recent observations by Dr. Suther- land, in his Clinical Lectures on Insanity, give a higher frequency than the observations of Leuret and Mitivié. The subject still requires investigation.


[91/216 b3303073x_0002_0091.jp2]

FEIGNED MONOMANIA. Py Besides the diagnostic marks to be gleaned from the foregoing description, and the precautions already mentioned under the. head of feigned diseases, some special tests have been recommended ; such as repeating to the suspected person a series of ideas recently uttered, when the real maniac will introduce new ideas, the impostor, on the contrary, will deem it expedient to repeat the same words. The use of the whirling chair is also recommended as a means of diagnosis. The giddiness and nausea produced by it totally incapacitate the impostor from continuing his fraud. Few impostors are sufficiently acquainted with the true characters of mania to be able to bear the test of a careful cross-examination. The answers given by Jean Pierre, a pretended maniac, brought be- fore the court of assizes of Paris, February 21, 1824, accused of forgery, swindling, and incendiarism, were such as at once to unmask the imposition. @. How old are you? A. Twenty-six years (he was forty-three). @. Have you ever had any business with Messrs. Pelléne and Des- granges (two of his dupes)? A. I don’t know them. Q. Do you acknowledge the pretended notorial deed which you gave this witness ? A. I do not understand you. @. You have acknowledged this deed before the commissary of police? A. Possibly. @. Why, the day of your arrest, did you tear up the bill for three thousand eight hundred francs? A. I don’t recollect. Q. You stated in your previous ex- aminations, that it was because the bill had been paid. A. Possibly. @. Do you know this witness (the portress of the house he lived in) ? A. I don’t know that woman? @. Can you point out any person who was confined in La Force with you, and who can give any ac- count of your then state of mind? A. I don’t understand you. @. You made your escape from the Bicétre? A. Were you there ? @. At what hour did you escape? A. At midnight—one o’clock— three o’clock. Q. What road did you take? A. That of Meaux en Brie. (He took that of Normandy.) @. Can you tell us who set the Bicétre on fire? A. I don’t know what youmean. Q. You wrote a letter to Captain Freyoff the day after your escape from the Bicétre? A. I did not write that letter. (It was his own hand-writing.) Dr. Ray justly observes, that there is perhaps not one of these answers that would have been given by a madman.* Partial Intellectual Mania. — Monomania. — Melancholia, — These partial forms of insanity are less frequently feigned than general mania. Impostors “are deficient in the presiding principle, the ruling delusion, the unfounded aversions, and causeless attachments, which characterize insanity; they are unable to mimic the solemn dignity of characteristic madness, nor to recur to those associations which mark this disorder ; and they will want the peculiarity of look which so strongly impresses an experienced observer.”*&gt;- The pretended monomaniac openly ob- * See the case quoted at length from Georget’s work by Ray, p. 233. + Haslam, Med. Jur. of Insanity, p. 323.


[92/216 b3303073x_0002_0092.jp2]

ey} RULES FOR EXAMINING PERSONS trudes his assumed delusion, and strives to make it square with other notions with which it has more or less relation ; the real monomaniac, on the other hand, does not solicit attention, and takes no pains to reconcile his many contradictions. The open display and searching after effect of the one, contrasts strongly with the reserve, the tacitur- nity, and the indifference of the other. The ungovernable fury which opposition and argument excite in most monomaniacs is also a very striking character of the real affection. A poor woman, who came under the author’s notice, becoming, without cause, jealous of her husband, believed that he was constantly whispering in her ear. When asked whether he was always present when she heard his voice, she would burst into a violent fit of crying, and immediately repeat her former story, to be again interrupted in the same way when placed in the same dilemma. In this case, as often happens in women, tears took the place of anger. Many of the characters of mania already described are common features of monomania, such as the irritability of temper, the violent prejudices, the sleeplessness, the insensibility to impressions, and to the operation of medicines. Moral Insanity.—As the character of the act or acts committed is the chief ground for believing in the existence of moral insanity, so there is no means of distinguishing the real from the feigned disease, provided the feigned disease manifest itself by strictly analogous actions. In the case of homicidal insanity, it is so unlikely that a man would commit a murder, for which no motive could be discovered, with the certainty of being hanged if found guilty, and imprisoned for life if acquitted, that we may fairly assume a homicide accompanied by all or many of the characters already pointed out to have been the result of real moral insanity. In general moral insanity it is of great im- portance to attend to the previous history of the case. Concealed Insanity. This has already been sufficiently examined among the general characteristics of insanity. A careful and repeated interrogating of the patient, long-continued observation, and the evi- dence of those who have known him in past times, may be necessary to detect the lurking disorder. RULES FOR THE EXAMINATION OF PERSONS SUPPOSED TO BE OF UNSOUND MIND. Under this head it is proposed to give a few simple directions as to the chief points to be attended to in the several examinations which the medical man may be required to institute. 1. Examine the general appearance of the individual, the shape of the head, the conformation of the body, the expression of the counte- nance, the temperament, the gait and movements, the speech, &amp;c. 2. Ascertain the state of the general health, especially of the func- tions of the organs of digestion, the appetite, the bowels, &amp;c. Does —


[93/216 b3303073x_0002_0093.jp2]

SUPPOSED TO BE OF UNSOUND MIND. 973 the person sleep well; or is he disturbed by dreams, or unusually restless? Is he susceptible of heat and cold, or the reverse ? 3. Inquire into the history of the person’s family. Has he any hereditary predisposition to insanity? Have any members of his family been subject to fits, or have they betrayed any marked eccen- tricity of behaviour ? 4. If the mind appear unsound, how long has it been so ?—from birth or from infancy P? If the unsoundness has supervened later in life, did it follow any mental shock, or long-continued anxiety of mind, any severe bodily illness, or repeated epileptic fits? Have the habits of life been regular or the reverse? Has he indulged in the use of in- toxicating liquors, or exposed himself habitually to causes of excitement ? 5. Does the present state of mind differ materially from that which existed when the party was reputed of sound mind? Have his feel- ings, affections, and domestic habits, undergone any marked change ? 6. When the inquiry is directed to ascertain the capacity of the mind, inquire as to the person’s knowledge of his family, and of the relation in which they stand to him ; as to his memory of persons re- cently seen, and of events which have recently transpired. Does he know his own age? Is he conscious of the lapse of time, and can he name the day of the week, the month, the year, &amp;c.? Does he know the name of the reigning monarch, and of those persons who are most frequently subjects of conversation ? Ascertain his knowledge of the simple operations of arithmetic, and of the value of money. Can he repeat those simple forms of words which are in general use, as the Lord’s Prayer, &amp;c.? Note his power of attention, and distinguish carefully between mere negative or affirmative answers to leading questions, and such as indicate judgment and reflection. If the inquiry relate not to the capacity of the mind, but to its soundness in other respects, endeavour to discover the existence of delusion by conversation directed to those topics which are most likely to interest and excite the mind. If the unsoundness affects the moral feelings rather than the intellect, make the relations and friends of the indi- vidual the subject of conversation. In cases of supposed moral in- sanity, inquire into the motives which may have led to the commission of the act of which the party is accused. 7. When undergoing examination in a court of law, the medical witness should carefully avoid all definitions of insanity, on the plea ‘that mental, like bodily diseases, do not admit of definition, but are subjects for description ; and that diagnosis in most cases must depend upon a comparison of several combined symptoms. The medical man should also insist on having sufficient opportunity of forming his opinion. He should rarely content himself with a single visit, and in cases of difficulty should require the party to be placed for some time under his inspection. In other respects the same observations apply to the examination of persons supposed to be of unsound mind as to other investigations which the medical man may be required to make.


[94/216 b3303073x_0002_0094.jp2]

274 PERSONS FOUND DEAD. CHAPTER VII. PERSONS FOUND DEAD.—REAL AND APPARENT DEATH.— SUDDEN DEATH.—SURVIVORSHIP. THE contents of this chapter are more closely allied than those of most of the preceding chapters. Under the title of Persons found Dead it is proposed to consider those general precautions which the medical man should observe in conducting inquiries concerning persons whose mode of death is altogether unknown, and to lay down some general rules relating to such cases. It will be seen, therefore, that this title is here used in a much more restricted sense than that which is often attached to it. As the first question which would naturally be raised is as to the reality of death, the subject of real and apparent death occupies the next place. This is followed by the title sudden death, in which some of the more common modes of dissolution are briefly considered ; and this, in turn, by the subject of survivorship, which is naturally and closely connected with it. PERSONS FOUND DEAD. Relation of the Body to surrounding Oljects—The place in which the Body is found.—Position of the Body.—Ewxamination of the Spot on which the Body is found —of the Soil or Surface on which tt lies— Position of surrounding Objects —The Clothes— Examination of the Body.— Post-mortem Inspection. In the chapter on Medical Evidence instructions were given as to the best mode of stating facts and opinions in a court of law, so as to give them their full force, and to render them admissible as evidence. It is proposed, in this place, to give some brief directions for observing and collecting a very iunportant class of these facts, namely, those which refer to persons found dead. It may be useful to recur to the distinction already made (p. 6) between a common and a skilled witness. In almost all medico-legal cases, but especially in those referring to persons found dead, these two functions are combined. The medical man is cognizant of two orders of facts,—those which re- quire no interpretation from him, and those from which he is expected to draw his own inferences. Let us suppose that he is sent for to a dying man, or to one already dead, and that he is subsequently re- quired by the coroner to make an examination of the body; he must of necessity observe many things connected with the body itself—the position in which it is placed, and the objects by which it is sur- rounded—which might just as well be observed and stated in evi- dence by any other person; but the post-mortem inspection can be made by himself alone. Hence the present inquiry branches off into two divisions. 1. The relation of the body to surrounding ob-


[95/216 b3303073x_0002_0095.jp2]

PLACE IN WHICH THE BODY IS FOUND. QTo jects. 2. Directions for the performance of post-mortem inspections for legal purposes: in other words, directions as to the best mode of performing the duties of a common witness and of a skdlled witness respectively. 1. RELATION OF THE BODY TO SURROUNDING OBJECTS. The professional duties which the medical man has to perform give him many opportunities of furthering the ends of justice. He is sum- moned to all cases of severe illness or sudden death, and is there- fore one of the first persons to become cognizant of those simple facts which in every criminal trial have so important a bearing on the decision of the case, and which constitute the presumptive or circumstantial evidence. But the medical man is not only one of the first witnesses of these facts; he is also in most cases by far the best educated and most intelligent witness. Whenever, then, he is called to visit the dying or the dead, under circumstances of suspicion, he should be alive to all that is passing around him, that no object, however trifling, which may possibly throw light on the cause of death, may be overlooked. The following are some of the principal points to which his attention should be directed :— The place in which the body is found.—This is the first thing which will attract attention ; and the first caution with regard to it is, not to conclude too hastily, that the spot in which a body is discovered is that in which death actually took place. A case enforcing this caution, and strongly reminding us of the story of the Hunchback. in the Arabian Nights, occurred about forty years since at Liverpool.- A body was found in an upright position, supported by railings which fenced a shipwright’s yard. On examination, it was prov ed that the deceased had been killed by a fracture of the skull inflicted by some blunt in- strument. A reward was offered, every effort was made to discover the murderer, and several parties were taken up on suspicion, but ac- quitted from want of evidence. Forty years afterwards, an old woman on her death-bed made the following confession : She was standing at the door of her house, and the deceased, passing by in a state of in- toxication, caught hold of her. She ran into the front parlour, and he with her; she called out, and her husband, who was a pilot, happen- ing to come in at the moment, took up the poker and killed the de- ceased at one blow. He and his wife, terrified at what had happened, began to think how the body should be disposed of, when the wife hit upon the plan of taking the body out, between 12 and 1 at night, being very dark, and rearing it against the railings where it was found by the watchman. The corpse was carried by her husband a distance of 200 or 300 yards from his house.” The position of the body.—We must endeavour to ascertain whether this position corresponds with the supposed or ascertained cause of * Times newspaper, Nov. 31, 1838.


[96/216 b3303073x_0002_0096.jp2]

276 PERSONS FOUND DEAD. death. In the case just quoted, the mere fact of a man killed by a blow on the head being found in an upright position, would have led to the inference, that the body had been placed in that position after death. It is not uncommon for a murderer, after having despatched his victim, to dispose of the body in such a way as to make it appear that the deceased died by his own hand. Thus persons who have been poisoned have afterwards been suspended by the neck, or thrown into the water. Sir Edmundbury Godfrey was found lying in a ditch with a distinct mark round his neck, which was dislocated, and with his own sword passed through his body; and there is little reason to doubt that he was first strangled, that the wound was inflicted after his death, and that the body was so disposed of as to lead to the be- lief that he had committed suicide.* It may happen, in cases of this kind, that something has been omitted by the criminal in the arrange- ment of the body itself or of the surrounding objects, which may ena- ble an intelligent witness to detect the fraud that has been committed. In cases of death by hanging, considerable importance may attach to the posture of the body. Examination of the spot on which the body is found.—It is often highly important to examine carefully the spot on which a body lies. A wound or bruise has been inflicted, and there is reason to regard the injury as the cause of death. The question naturally arises: Might not the wound or bruise have been caused by a fall on some body projecting from the spot on which the body was found? Thus, in the case of a man who was found lying in a field with a severe bruise on the head, the question was put— Might not the deceased have fallen on a stone, or on a fragment of wood? The answer was easy: the field had been carefully searched, and no such object could be found near the spot on which the body lay. In another extremely interesting case, an intel- ligent medical witness found a small wound in the head, which had passed through the integuments and bones to the brain, and he stated that it must have been caused either by a fall on a sharp object, such as a nail fixed in the floor, or by some pointed weapon. The floor was examined, but no such object was to be found. It followed, therefore, that the wound had been inflicted by some small pointed instrument. The murderer confessed that he had struck his victim with the point of a pair of snuffers. There are many occasions on which this close correspondence of wounds or bruises found on a dead body with the objects immediately surrounding it forms a most impor- tant item in the evidence by which the cause of death is determined. Thus, in the case of the Prince de Condé, who was found suspended by the neck in his bed-room, certain abrasions found on the legs and one of the shoulders corresponded closely with the position of sur- rounding objects ; those on the legs with a heavy chair placed close to the body, and that on the shoulder with a projecting part of the win- * See the case at greater length in Beck’s Med. Jur. p. 644.


[97/216 b3303073x_0002_0097.jp2]

RELATION OF THE BODY TO SURROUNDING OBJECTS, 277 dow to which he was suspended. This case created a great deal of discussion, and many persons were of opinion that the prince had been murdered and afterwards suspended. The correspondence of the bruises with the position of the chair and window harmonized much better with the struggles of a man suspended during life than with any other cause to which they could be attributed, and gave strong confirmation to the opinion of those who attributed the death to suicide. The soil or surface on which the body lies may furnish important indications. It rarely happens that a struggle takes place without leaving on the spot itself some traces which may be compared with the clothes of the suspected murderer or of his victim. Stains of blood upon the clothes, for instance, or impressions of the foot on the soil, have led to detection. An interesting example of this latter kind is given by Sir Walter Scott. The murderer was discovered by the print of his foot which he left on the clay floor of the cottage in the death struggle. The measure of the foot, the tread, and the mode in which the sole of one of the shoes had been patched, corresponded most closely with the foot-mark; and this was the first link in the chain of evidence which led to the conviction of the murderer.* Position of surrounding objects—WHaving examined the spot on which the body lies, attention should next be directed to the position of the objects that surround it. Oftentimes the instrument of death is found lying near the body, and as, in certain cases, its relation to the corpse may furnish important evidence, it should always be care- fully noted. In cases of suspected poisoning, every vessel in which food has recently been prepared and administered should be carefully examined, and its contents reserved for analysis. The same observa- tion applies to suspicious liquids or powders which may be found in the apartment. The bearing and conduct of the parties in attendance should not be overlooked. Crime is rarely self-possessed, and, when most on his guard, the culprit is apt to betray himself by an excess of caution. The medical man, therefore, should be alive to all that is taking place around him. The Clothes—Having noted the position of the body, the spot on which it lies, the objects by which it is surrounded, and the persons who are in attendance, the medical man now proceeds to a more close inspection of the body itself. He examines the clothes; they may be covered with mud, or corroded by an acid, or stained by blood, or by some animal secretion ; or they may be torn as if during a struggle, or cut by a sharp instrument. The position of the stain and the direction of the rents or cuts must be carefully noted. The indications to be derived from an observation of these things must vary with each case ; but it is easy to understand how they may prove important. * Lockhart’s Life of Sir Walter Scott, vol. iii. p. 39.


[98/216 b3303073x_0002_0098.jp2]

278 PERSONS FOUND DEAD. If the clothes have been cut, we must examine them to see whether the size, shape, and direction of the cuts coincide in the several garments, and whether they correspond with any wounds that may be found on the body itself; for it sometimes happens that a murderer tries to conceal his crime, by cutting the clothes after he has wounded the body, and the wounds and incisions do not coincide. Crimes have often been discovered in consequence of the close cor- respondence of things found in the possession of the accused, with things used in the perpetration of the crimes themselves. As the discovery of such means of identifying a criminal falls more frequently to the lot of the police-officer than to that of the medical man, the subject is merely mentioned in this place. These are some of the points to be attended to; but neither examples nor rules can do more than suggest the sort of inquiries which we should be prepared to make; each man’s own judgment and foresight must prompt the particular points to be observed in individual instances. One general rule, indeed, may be laid down. The medical man should never content himself with the mere pas- sive exercise of his senses or judgment. It is not enough to see the objects which actually present themselves to the eye ; he must look for such as are not obvious at the first glance. To the correctness of a good observer he must add the intelligence and invention of an experimenter. He must beware of a hasty decision, and remember that the apparent cause of death is not always the real one. A man may die a natural death, in a situation or under circumstances which may cause suspicion to fall upon the innocent ; the murderer may place his victim in a situation which may attach guilt to an innocent party, or lead to the belief that the deceased died by his own hand. To guard against all such sources of error, the medical man must arm himself with caution and even with scepticism ; without the first of these, at least, he may both endanger his own reputation and the lives of his fellow-creatures. The service which an intelligent medical wit- ness may have it in his power to render to the cause of justice cannot be better illustrated than by the following case, for which the author is indebted to his friend Dr. James Reid. It is given as nearly as possible in his own words :— ““ T was sent for one day to a man and his wife, whom I found lying in the same room with their throats cut. The woman lay on the floor with her right arm extended under the bed, and a razor close to her right hand. Her throat was deeply cut from ear*to ear, and she lay in a complete pool of blood. The husband, who was in bed, had received a wound in the throat, which had merely divided the trachea without wounding any important blood-vessel, and without causing any great loss of blood. When questioned, he gave the following ac- count:—TIn the middle of the night he was roused from sleep by receiving a wound in the throat from the hand of his wife. The shock, the wound, and the loss of blood together, had prevented him


[99/216 b3303073x_0002_0099.jp2]

POST-MORTEM INSPECTION. 279 from making any resistance or giving any alarm. My suspicions were roused, partly by the man’s manner, and partly by observing the water in a basin standing in the room slightly tinged with blood. In en- deavouring to find some confirmation of my suspicions, a thought struck me. TJ turned up the bed-clothes, and found the sole of the foot covered with dried blood. I stated this fact to the jury at the coroner’s inquest : a verdict of guilty was immediately returned, but the man died almost at the moment that the sentence was passed.” A more instructive case than this could scarcely have been selected. 2. EXAMINATION OF THE BODY.—POST-MORTEM INSPECTION. The medical man having discharged the duty of a common witness by noting all those points which may throw light on the mode and cause of death, proceeds to the examination of the body itself. Should the body be that of some person unknown, we must note all those cir- cumstances which may lead to its identification—the sex and probable age, the stature, the degree of corpulence, the colour of the hair and eyes, and any peculiar marks which may exist on the surface of the body. Those appearances which serve to denote how long the party has been dead, viz. the presence or absence of animal heat, of cada- veric rigidity, and of putrefaction, and the extent to which the latter change has gone, must then be observed. These will be the subject of the next chapter. The condition of the several parts of the body must now be noted, and any wounds, contusions, or excoriations which may exist, must be described, and in this description we must not content our- selves with general phrases, if any certain measure can be applied. We must then examine the neck, back, and limbs, to ascertain whether any dislocation or fracture exists, and we must not hastily assume that the bones are not displaced or injured because the external parts of the body bear no traces of contusion or laceration. We should compress the chest to ascertain whether blood or any fluid mixed with air or gas escapes from the mouth or nostrils. The cavity of the mouth should be inspected ; for suffocation has been produced by foreign bodies in- troduced into it. The anus should be examined, for poisons have been introduced into the body by that opening. In new-born chil- dren the orbits, fontanelles and nuche should be inspected in search of minute wounds inflicted by pointed instruments. In women the breasts should be examined, especially beneath the deep fold which they form with the skin of the chest, for there is a case on record in which a woman, found suspended by the neck, was at first thought to have died of strangulation, but on closer inspection a minute wound inflicted by a pointed instrument, and extending to the heart, was found concealed by the left breast. The female organs of generation should also be examined, for there are cases on record in which arsenic has been introduced, or strong acids injected into these parts, some-


[100/216 b3303073x_0002_0100.jp2]

280 © REAL AND APPARENT DEATH. times with a view of destroying the female herself, in other cases to procure abortion. There is also one horrible case on record, in which a woman was murdered by deep incisions made on the internal surface of the labia pudendi. Post-mortem Inspection.—There is one great rule to be observed in conducting post-mortem inspections for medico-legal purposes, and that is, to examine every cavity of the body. Even when the cause of death is quite obvious, it is well to observe this caution ; for if any part of the body have been left unexamined, the objection may be made that the cause of death might have been found there, or, at any rate, that some disease may have been present which would have given a mortal character to an injury not otherwise fatal. Chaussier has given very minute directions for performing post- mortem examinations for legal purposes ; but such detail is quite un- necessary. No one who is aware of the important object of the inspection will be likely to perform it in a hasty or slovenly manner ; and provided it be done with care, the precise order or mode in which the several cavities are opened is of little importance. All traces of injury, whether external or internal, must of course be very minutely and carefully examined and described. Specific directions for post-mortem examinations in cases of rape, delivery, poisoning, infanticide, &amp;c., are given under those heads. REAL AND APPARENT DEATH. Questions as to the Reality of Death of rare occurrence in this Country.— What Condition of the System has been most frequently mistaken for Real Death. — Syncope. — Voluntary Syncope. — Case of Colonel Townshend.— A sphyaia.—Signs of Death.—Cessation of the Respira- tion.—Of the Circulation Facies Hippocratica.—State of the Eye. —Of the Skin.— Insensibility, Immobility, and loss of the Intellectual Faculties.—Loss of Muscular Irritability.— Extinction of Animal Heat, Cadaveric Rigidity, and Putrefaction, considered not only as Signs of Death, but as means of determining how long Life has been extinct.— Phenomena of Putrefaction in Air and Water. When a medical man is sent for on a sudden to a person who has fallen into a state of insensibility, and finds him lying motionless, the first question which would arise in his mind is, whether the person is really dead ; and although the question seems very easy of solution, it is not altogether so simple as not to deserve a little attention. It is true that it has very rarely happened in this country that per- sons have been treated as if they were dead when they were really alive, although one or two authors who have taken great pains to collect examples of so melancholy a mistake have not found their search altogether fruitless. In consequence of the supposed or actual infrequency of such events in England, no medical author of reputation has written at any length


[101/216 b3303073x_0002_0101.jp2]

REAL AND APPARENT DEATH. 281 on this subject ; the only work devoted expressly to it in our own language being from the pen of a clergyman, the Rev. Mr. Whiter, whom Dr. Gordon Smith accuses of “ having laboured under one mis- take from the title-page to the concluding paragraph.” The little attention which has been given to this subject in England is attributable to the popular usages in respect of interment—the body being never committed to the grave until putrefaction has taken place. As this usage with regard to interments prevents all risk of persons being buried before life is actually extinct, this subject of real and ap- parent death might be summarily dismissed, but that there are other reasons which justify its introduction in a work on Forensic Medicine. In the first place, it has been suggested that in times of pestilence a regard to public safety would require the bodies of the dead to be interred before the infallible sign of putrefaction had made its appear- ance ; and we might be obliged to trust to other indications of a less satisfactory nature. In the second place, it must be borne in mind that the question of real or apparent death may be one of practical importance long before the usual period of interment arrives, and when the decision of the question must determine the adoption or neglect of the measures usually resorted to with a view of restoring animation. If the medical man. decides hastily, and without due examination, that death has really taken place, he may omit, or prematurely desist from, the employment of those means by the persevering use of which life might have been restored. To these reasons for allowing this subject a place in the present treatise may be added the example of most authors on Forensic Medi- cine, and the fact that, on the Continent, and especially in France, it has employed the pens of some of the most distinguished medico-legal writers. Bruhier, for instance, has contrived to bring together no less than 180 cases, in 52 of which persons were buried alive, 4 were opened before death, 53 revived after being placed in their coffins, and 72 were pronounced dead when they were "really living.* Bruhier was preceded by Winslow, who is said to have been led to devote especial attention to this subject from having been twice pro- nounced dead himself. The writings of Winslow and Bruhier excited much attention in France, and influenced the minds of the best authors on Forensic Medicine in that country in favour of their views ; Mahon, Foderé, and Orfila having shown some disposition to give credence to the strange and improbable stories of those authors. The importance attached to the subject in France led Professor Louis to devote much attention to it, and to write a book, of which the title “ Sur la Certitude des Signes de la Mort” expressed his dissent from the doctrines of Bruhier. There is no other subject connected with Forensic Medicine which can boast so large a collection of strange and improbable fictions ; but * Sur l’'Incertitude des Signes de la Mort.


[102/216 b3303073x_0002_0102.jp2]

282 REAL AND APPARENT DEATH. mixed with them there are doubtless some well-authenticated cases. One of these is given on the authority of Professor Louis. A stout young country girl having been brought to bed at the Hotel Dieu, walked to the hospital Salpétriere on the second day, to avoid a malady that had proved fatal to several patients in the former hospital. She was so much exhausted by the exertion, that she fainted on her arrival ; and though she recovered in the first instance, she was re- puted dead upon a recurrence of the fit. The attendant sent notice to Louis that there was a subject for him; and his pupils, without examining, carried her off to the anatomical theatre. Next morning, the professor was informed that moans and the like noises had been heard in the theatre. On repairing thither, the subject (really dead now) gave evidence of having in vain struggled to disentangle herself from the winding-sheet. One leg was thrust from the bier, and an arm rested on the bar of an adjoining table. It is unnecessary to multiply instances of such melancholy mistakes. It is not to be wondered at that the vulgar should mistake the repose and apparent lifelessness of a fainting fit for the sleep of death, or that even the medical man, if he will not take the pains to make a careful examination, should fall into a similar error. It is possible that one or other of the cases mentioned in most works on Forensic Medicine, of persons being roused from apparent death by the touch of the ana- tomist’s scalpel, may have really occurred.* That some of the many recorded instances of apparent mistaken for real death, and consequent premature interment, have really occurred, scarcely admits of doubt, and they are rendered the more probable by a class of cases which seems to point clearly enough to the exact condition of the living body that has been thus confounded with actual death. These are cases in which persons have been roused from what seemed the sleep of death by the accidental employment of the very means that are found most efficacious in restoring those who have fainted,—a strong reason for believing that, in the majority of instances at least, the apparent death, about which so much has been said and written, is nothing more nor less than a state of syncope. Thus, many cases are recorded in which persons taken for dead have been restored to life by sprinkling them with cold water. Hippocrates mentions the case of a woman, who being in appearance dead from fever, was restored by throwing 30 amphoree of cold water over the body. The philanthropic Howard, in his work on Prisons, says, “I have known instances, where persons supposed to be dead of the gaol fever, and brought out for burial, on being washed with cold water have shown signs of life, and soon afterwards recovered.” The inference drawn from the success of so simple a means as the * Case of Prévot d’Exiles; another on the authority of Philippe Peu, a cele- brated French accoucheur; a third quoted by Bruhier on the authority of the Abbé Ménon; and that of the Spanish gentleman dissected by Vesalius, in whom the heart was found beating.


[103/216 b3303073x_0002_0103.jp2]

CASE OF COLONEL TOWNSHEND. 233 sprinkling with cold water, that apparent death is nothing but syncope, is strengthened by the efficacy of pure and cold air in producing the same result. Diemerbrock mentions the case of a rustic, who having appeared to die of the plague, discovered after three days no signs of respiration, but, on being carried to the grave, recovered and lived many years afterwards ; and Paul Zacchias relates an analogous case which oc- curred at the hospital of Santo Spirito at Rome. One of the best authenticated instances of this kind is that of the daughter of Henry Laurens, the first President of the American Con- gress. When an infant she had the small-pox, and was laid out as dead ; upon which the window of the apartment, that had been care- fully closed during the progress of the disease, was thrown open to ventilate the chamber, when the fresh air revived the supposed corpse, and restored her to her family. This circumstance occasioned in the father so powerful a dread of being buried alive, that he directed by will that his body should be burnt, and enjoined on his children the performance of this wish as a sacred duty. If the story told by Pliny of a certain Avicola, whose body was brought out and placed on the funeral pile, the flames of which resuscitated the unhappy victim, but too late to allow him to be rescued, be true, this caution might not have availed him. Such cases as these are very likely to have been of frequent occur- rence before the time of Sydenham, who abolished the stifling system of treating eruptive diseases, especially small-pox. It is not to be wondered at that persons shut up in close apartments during a long and debilitating disease should fall into a state of long-continued syn- cope; or that, by inattentive observers, this state should be mistaken for death. In such cases, all that would be required in order to resusci- tate the supposed corpse would be a draught of fresh air or a sprinkling of cold water. The efficacy of cold air and cold water, therefore, in restoring those who have been supposed dead, gives us the best reason for believing that, in most cases, the state confounded with actual death was nothing more than syncope; and this state of the body bears so close a resemblance to real death, that even the medical man may be justified in trusting more to the effect of the means of resuscitation than to any positive signs of death. There is no doubt that some individuals have possessed the power of fainting at will, for such cases are reported by more than one author. A minutely-described and well-authenticated instance of this kind, that of the Honourable Colonel Townshend, is related by Cheyne.* The following is an account of this singular case in the words of Dr. Cheyne :— ““ He told us, he had sent for us to give him some account of an odd sensation he had for some time observed and felt in himself; which * English Malady, p. 307. ROE ME ae &gt;


[104/216 b3303073x_0002_0104.jp2]

284 REAL AND APPARENT DEATH. was, that composing himself, he could die or eapire when he pleased, and yet, by an efort, or somehow, he could come to life again: which, it seems, he had sometimes tried before he had sent for us. We all three felt his pulse first: it was distinct, though small and thready, and his heart had its usual beating. He composed himself on his back, and lay in a still posture some time; while I held his right hand, Dr. Baynard laid his hand on his heart, and Mr. Skrine held a clean looking-glass to his mouth. I found his pulse sink gradually, till at last I could not feel any by the most exact and nice touch. Dr. Baynard could not feel the least motion in his heart, nor Mr. Skrine discern the least soil of breath on the bright mirror he held to his mouth. Then each of us by turns examined his arm, heart, and breath, but could not by the nicest scrutiny discover the least symptom of life in him. This continued about half an hour. As we were going away (thinking him dead) we observed some motion about the body, and upon examination found his pulse and the motion of his heart gradually returning ; he began to breathe gently, and speak softly.” This experiment was made in the morning, and he died in the even- ing. On opening the body nothing was discovered but disease of the kidney, for which he had long been under medical treatment, all the other viscera being perfectly sound. This case of voluntary syncope is not only curious but instructive, as it renders it in the highest degree probable, that there may be states of system so nearly resembling death as even to deceive medical men, and distinguishable from real death only by the continuance of animal heat and the absence of rigidity. Asphyxia is another condition of system which may be mistaken for real death, and which can be distinguished from it only by the result of the means employed for the recovery of the patient. As Dr. Gordon Smith has well observed, “ Between the state of asphyxia, or anima- tion merely suspended, and that of absolute death, the only satisfactory means of discrimination is the result of the proper application of the approved means of recovery.” There are also states of system, vulgarly known by the name of trance, occurring mostly in hysterical women, and resembling death in the motionless and insensible state of the frame. The case of Colonel Townshend renders it probable that in some of these instances there may have been that absence of the functions of respiration and circulation which might deceive even medical men. At any rate, we are not justified either in treating such cases as fabulous, or in assert- ing that the semblance of death may not be such as to require the use of some test more sure than those resorted to in that curious case. ‘The most important application of the fact, that there are certain states of the living system which may closely simulate death, is that we should not too soon give over our attempts to resuscitate those who have appeared to die by some means applied to them when in a state of health, or by some disease which is not of a necessarily fatal


[105/216 b3303073x_0002_0105.jp2]

SIGNS OF DEATH. 285 character, such as hemorrhage. On this subject Dr. Gordon Smith makes some very sensible observations. After quoting Bruhier’s commentary on Winslow’s Thesis on the uncertainty of the signs of death, in which Bruhier complains that many lives have been lost, that might otherwise have been saved, by the Roman Catholic rite of extreme unction, which being administered to persons in the last extremity, allows of no subsequent interference with the dying person, he says, “I have myself been debarred from the exercise of my pro- fessional duty, by means of this very act, where had the religious pro- fession of the patient been different, there would have been no reason to suppose that the continued administration of remedies was either improper or utterly hopeless. How often have we seen in that ex- haustion which accompanies many diseases, every superficial indication of death dissipated by sedulous care and judicious applications, and - recovery to health and vigour take place! And in certain times of public sickness, during the confusion of a battle, or under a dread of speedy putrefaction, possibly we might encounter practical illustrations of that apprehension which in ordinary circumstances must be con- sidered chimerical.” ‘ Asphyxia, or suspended animation, too, is often undistinguishable from recent death ; and from ignorance of the real history of the case, it may be feared that the means of resuscita- tion are sometimes withheld, or but indolently employed, where judi- cious practice and adequate perseverance might be crowned with success.”” Where the circumstances of the case, then, are such as to afford the slightest hope of recovery, the medical man, should persevere in the use of means, and not allow himself to be discouraged by want of immediate success, It isin these cases that the effect of the means employed forms the true test of the reality of death. SIGNS OF DEATH. The principal signs of death insisted upon by authors are, a. Cessa- tion of the Circulation ; b. Cessation of the Respiration ; c. The Facies Hippocratica ; d. The State of the Eye; e. The State of the Skin ; f. Insensibility and Immobility ; g. The Extinction of Muscular Irri- tability ; 4. The Extinction of Animal Heat ; 7. Cadaveric Rigidity ; k. Putrefaction. a. Cessation of the Circulation.—The usual mode of determining whether or not the heart still continues to beat is the application of the finger to the wrist, and the hand or ear to the heart. It is ob- vious that these means may be insufficient, for though the stronger contractions of the heart may be perceived in these several ways, there is reason to believe that the weaker ones would altogether escape de- tection. It will not be possible, therefore, by any or all of these tests, to assure ourselves that the heart has really ceased to beat, and the blood to circulate. Even assuming that these means would enable us


[106/216 b3303073x_0002_0106.jp2]

286 REAL AND APPARENT DEATH. to detect the weakest contractions of the heart, there is reason to be- lieve that life may be restored even after the entire cessation of the heart’s action. Whether the heart cease to beat altogether, or contract so feebly as not to make itself perceptible to the hand or ear, is of little consequence, as the fact of its contractions being apparently sus- pended for a time is enough to deprive the test of all practical value. In the remarkable case of Colonel Townshend, the contractions of the heart appeared to have entirely ceased, and that for a long interval, and yet life was not extinct. The same thing occurs, though for a shorter time, in all cases of syncope and asphyxia, whether they prove fatal or not. The cessation of the circulation, therefore, is not a sure sign of death. -b. Cessation of the Respiration.—If the possibility of the heart’s action being suspended for a time be conceded, there is no difficulty in supposing the suspension of the respiration for an equal space. The tests of respiration—the looking-glass, the feather, the cup of water placed on the chest or abdomen—are more certain in their nature than those by which we seek to determine the continuance of the heart’s action. It is scarcely possible that respiration should take place in any degree, and yet escape detection by such means. Now, in the case of Colonel Townshend, the looking-glass remained for a long pe- riod unsoiled, and no trace of respiration could be detected. For practical purposes, therefore, it may be fairly assumed, that respiration, like the circulation, may be suspended for a time, and that such sus- pension is not a sure sign of death. The same remarks apply to the joint cessation of the functions of respiration and circulation as to the cessation of either separately. ce. The Facies Hippocratica.—This peculiar appearance of counte- nance is thus described by Foderé :—‘ A wrinkled and dry brow ; hollow eyes ; pointed nose, bordered with a black discolouration ; a depressed, hollow, and wrinkled state of the temples ; elevation of the ears ; the lips relaxed and pendant ; the cheek bones sunk ; the chin wrinkled and pointed; the skin dry and livid, or lead-coloured ; a dull white powder on the hair of the nostrils and eye-brows ;”—in fact, such an entire alteration of the physiognomy as to render the indivi- dual almost irrecognizable. There are several objections to this sign. 1, It is not universally met with, being sometimes present in those who are worn out by lingering suffering, but nearly always absent in cases of sudden death, and in the victims of acute disease. 2. Wherever it has been present in the dead, it must have existed in the dying. Hence it is a sign that a man is dying, full as much as that he is dead. 3. It has been observed where recovery has taken place. 4, It is often present in living persons ; and, according to Foderé, a strong impression of danger, the apprehension of a dreadful punish- ment, or the anticipation of certain death, may bring about a state of countenance similar to that described.


[107/216 b3303073x_0002_0107.jp2]

SIGNS OF DEATH. sre Doge 5. Where it exists, it does not long survive the extinction of life. This sign, therefore, cannot be relied on; its absence does not prove that a man is not dead, nor does its presence afford sufficient evidence that life is extinct. . d. State of the Eye-—The formation of a tenacious glairy mucus, almost of the consistence of membrane, covering the conjunctiva, and with difficulty removed from it ; a loss of transparency in the cornea, and especially a collapsed and wrinkled state of that membrane—have been mentioned among the signs of death. These signs, too, are not worthy of implicit confidence ; for the conjunctiva may be invested by a mucous film in the living, and the cornea may lose its usual bril- liancy. The collapsed and softened state of the eye, generally attri- buted to the absorption of the aqueous humour, is an appearance to which Professor Louis attached much importance ; and there is no doubt that, in most cases, it makes its appearance very early. But it must be recollected, that it does not exist in all forms of death. In death from apoplexy, and from the inhalation of carbonic acid, the eyes preserve their brilliancy and prominence for along time. The same is said to be the case in death from prussic acid. Where, too, the eyes are dull and collapsed after death, the commencement of the putrefac- tive process sends blood towards the head, and makes the eyes bril- lant and prominent. Nysten produced this state of the eyes at will, by introducing substances in a state of fermentation into the stomach after death. e. State of the Skin.—Pallor of the skin, owing to the absence of circulation ; livid discolowrations, the result of the irregular subsidence of the blood, and loss of elasticity, so that if the skin be pressed, it does not resume its original form,—have been mentioned among the signs of death. The first two may exist during life, and the first is not always present after death ; but loss of elasticity is a sign of con- siderable value. J. Insensibility and Immobility—As both of these may exist during life as well as after death, it is absurd to name these among the signs of death. They are of course present in all cases of apparent death in which dife may be restored by proper appliances. The combined loss of voluntary motion and sensibility is not of rare occurrence in hysterie females, and it is present in the mesmeric slumber, so that the strong stimulants which have been recommended as tests of the reality of death produce no effect. In these cases, however, the functions of circulation and respiration go on uninterruptedly, and a careful ob- server will detect a vibrating movement of the eyelid, which forms an exception to the general rule of immobility. This peculiar vibration of the eyelids is probably present in all cases of so-called trance. Extinction of Muscular Irritability.— When muscular irritability is altogether extinct, life may be assumed to be extinct also. Nysten has recommended this as a certain criterion of death. He tells us to lay a muscle bare, and test it by pricking it or by applying the galva-


[108/216 b3303073x_0002_0108.jp2]

288 REAL AND APPARENT DEATH. nic or electric fluid. If it do not contract, death has certainly taken place ; if it do contract, the person is either alive or recently dead.* The left ventricle of the heart is the first part of the frame in which irritability is extinct, the right auricle the last. The muscles of the trunk and extremities retain their irritability longer than the involun- tary muscles, with the one exception of the right auricle. Among the voluntary muscles, those of the upper extremity are the last to lose their irritability, and the muscles of the trunk the first. These re- sults, obtained by Nysten from an examination of seven decapitated criminals, would probably apply to death from natural causes, but the period of extinction would of course vary. Among the more trivial signs of death, the flexure of the thumb across the palm of the hand may be mentioned. The thumb assumes this position in most cases, if not in all, and even before cadaveric rigidity comes on. It is similarly contracted in spasmodic affections of the muscles of the hand. The foregoing signs are merely signs of death, and not means of de- termining how long life has been extinct. Those which remain to be discussed, viz. the extinction of animal heat, rigidity, and putrefaction, at the same time that they are, with the exception of the extinction of muscular irritability, the only certain signs of death, are also means of determining, with more or less precision and certainty, the period at which death took place. These signs must therefore be examined a little more closely. SIGNS OF DEATH WHICH ARE ALSO MEANS OF DETERMINING HOW LONG LIFE HAS BEEN EXTINCT. h. Extinction of Animal Heat.— One of the chief peculiarities of liv- ing beings is, that they retain a temperature independent of the media in which they are placed. This temperature is closely dependent on the circulation of the blood ; so that when this ceases, in a part of the body or in the entire frame, that part, or the whole body, soon be- comes cold. Thus, the extremities generally become cold before death ; and as the circulation becomes more and more languid, even the internal parts of the body grow cold, and the breath as it issues from the lungs themselves is felt to have a low tempera- ture. But it is only when life is extinct, that all the parts of the body become cold. The entire extinction of animal heat may therefore be justly regarded as a sign of death. But the persistence of it must not be considered as a proof that life still continues ; for, according to Foderé and Mahon, the bodies of individuals apparently dead, and who have not been restored to life, have retained their heat ~ for more than four days. If these cases are authentic, it is probable that some remnant of the vital principle still lingered in the bodies, though life could not be restored ; for if they were in every respect * Récherches de Physiologie et de Chimie Pathologique.


[109/216 b3303073x_0002_0109.jp2]

SIGNS OF DEATH, EXTINCTION OF ANIMAL HEAT. RIGIDITY. 289 reduced to the condition of dead matter, they must long before that period have fallen to the temperature of surrounding objects. The same explanation may perhaps be given of some curious excep- tions to the general rule observed in cholera morbus. An extreme coldness of the surface is among the most marked symptoms of that disease ; but in certain fatal cases, after death had apparently taken place, the temperature of the abdomen, and sometimes of the whole body, was observed to rise suddenly, so as, on one occasion, to reach 86° or 87° of Fahrenheit.* It must be borne in mind, on the other hand, that a great degree of coldness of surface exists during life in all cases in which the circula- tion is very languid, or the powers of the nervous system greatly de- pressed. Thus, there is great coldness of surface in syncope, asphyxia, and trance, and in paralytic affections. A great diminution of animal heat, taken by itself, therefore, is not a certain sign of death, as the continuance of animal heat is not a proof of life. This sign must be taken in connexion with others, and in no case admits of application until life has already been some time extinct. The extinction of animal heat is not a very sure means of determin- ing the period at which death took place, for the body cools with very different degrees of rapidity in different modes of death, the period varying from two or three hours to fifteen or twenty, and, if we may trust to the authority of Foderé and Mahon, to upwards of four days. The following are some of the chief causes which influence the cool- ing of the body :— 1, The temperature and moisture of the surrounding air; the still- ness or motion of the atmosphere; the covered or naked state of the body itself; and, in fact, all the causes which affect the cooling of dead matter. It takes place more speedily in water than in air. 2. The condition of the body itself. It takes place more slowly in the corpulent than in the emaciated. 3. The age. The bodies of the aged cool more rapidly than those of younger persons. 4, The mode of death. The body parts with its heat more ra- pidly after death from chronic diseases, or from hemorrhage ; more slowly after all forms of sudden death; after apoplexy, the various forms of asphyxia, coup de soleil, &amp;c. In persons falling victims to the same disease, the extinction of animal heat is, ceteris paribus, as the rapidity with which they prove fatal. In chronic diseases, the body parts with much of its heat during life. a. Rigidity—F or some time after life is, to all appearance, extinct, the muscles continue to contract on the application of stimuli. This irritability, as has been stated, is of short duration, even in the mus- cles of voluntary motion, probably not continuing, in extreme cases, longer than two hours, When this muscular irritability ceases, cada- veric rigidity sets in. * Medical Gazette, 1832-3.


[110/216 b3303073x_0002_0110.jp2]

290 REAL AND APPARENT DEATH. This rigidity takes place in all classes of animals alike, and is the first certain evidence of death. It is confined to the muscular system ; for so long as the muscles remain entire, the limbs continue inflexible, unless great force be used ; but when they are cut or torn, the rigi- dity ceases. In some cases, the contraction of the muscles is so strong that the body may be lifted by the head and feet, like a plank of wood. It takes place also in all positions of the body, and whether the limbs be flexed or extended. Hence, it does not change the posi- tions which the several parts of the body had at the time of death. It is entirely independent of the nervous system, for it makes its ap- pearance after the nerves have ceased to be excited by the galvanic fluid. A division of the nerves, or even the removal of the entire brain, does not prevent its occurrence ; and in death from apoplexy or hemiplegia, the paralyzed limb is affected in the same way, and to the same extent, as the sound one. This curious phenomenon is regarded by John Hunter as the last act of the vital principle, and by Nysten as a concentration of the remaining vital powers in the muscles, pre- paratory to the total disappearance of the vital principle. It was originally supposed to commence only with the complete ex- tinction of the animal heat ; but it is now known to make its appear- ance long before the body has cooled, and to commence in those parts which lose their heat the latest. The following is the order of its ap- pearance :—The muscles of the trunk and neck, those of the upper extremity, those of the lower. It disappears nearly in the same order ; the muscles of the lower extremity often remaining rigid when those of the trunk and upper extremity have resumed their state of relaxation. The degree and duration of the rigidity are, ceteris paribus, di- rectly as the muscular development. The period, too, at which it takes place has an important influence upon its amount and dura- tion ; the later it occurs, the longer it lasts, and vice versa. The malady of which a patient dies has also a marked effect. When death is occasioned by diseases accompanied by great debility, such as low fever, consumption, scurvy, &amp;c., and the diseases of old age, the rigi- dity takes place very speedily, and disappears again in the course of one or two hours. When, on the contrary, death is caused by acute inflammation of the stomach or viscera, by irritant poisons, whether mineral, vegetable, or aerial (provided they exert no specific influence on the contractile powers of the muscles), the rigidity is for the most part strongly developed, and lasts for a considerable time. In cases of death from spasmodic cholera it is said that rigidity has commenced soon after death, and has not ceased till after the lapse of four or five days. It is slow in showing itself in death from apoplexy, hamor- rhage, wounds of the heart, decapitation, injury of the spinal marrow, and asphyxia, especially that produced by carbonic acid. The dura- tion of the rigidity in poisoning with this agent is very considerable, and in one case Nysten found that it continued seven days. Sulphu-


[111/216 b3303073x_0002_0111.jp2]

SIGNS OF DEATH. PUTREFACTION. 291 retted hydrogen gas, on the other hand, has the effect of preventing the occurrence of rigidity. Though rigidity may make its appearance long before the animal heat has disappeared, it may be retarded by the application of warmth, or accelerated by exposure to cold. In those cases, too, in which the animal heat lasts for an unusually long period, as in the several forms of asphyxia, especially in that caused by the inhalation of carbonic acid gas, rigidity does not develop itself so soon as after other more common forms of death. A knowledge of this fact may prove service- able in determining the probable period at which death took place ; and it has, on more than one occasion, been practically applied. It is scarcely possible to confound cadaveric rigidity with any state of the living body. It has been asserted, that the stiffness arising from exposure to intense cold may simulate it. If such a stiffness were to occur in one apparently dead, it could only arise from the congelation of the fluids of the limb; in that case there would be no dif- ficulty in moving the limb, and the crackling of the small particles of ice would furnish an easy criterion. Syncope, asphyxia, apoplexy, catalepsy, and tetanus, are enumerated as diseases in which a rigidity of the muscular system may be met with similar to cadaveric rigidity. Of course the only cases in which any difficulty can arise are those in which respiration, circulation, and all the other vital actions, have been for a time suspended. It is said that the existence of animal heat, and the prevalence of the contraction through the whole body, will distinguish the rigidity present in those cases from that of death ; but we have seen that the dead body may be rigid in all its parts even whilst the animal heat still remains. This criterion, therefore, will not serve us in all cases. If any dis- tinction were necessary, it could be drawn from the effect of bending the extremity forcibly ; when, if the rigidity was due to a vital con- traction, the limb would be restored to its original position, which would not happen in the rigidity of death. Rigidity, then, is a cer- tain sign of death, and a state not easily confounded with any existing in the living body, or in the several forms of apparent death. Super- vening, too, as it does, after the extinction of muscular irritability, it is the first indication of the hopelessness of our attempts at resuscita- tion. k, Putrefaction—This, too, is an infallible sign of death; one about which it is almost impossible to make any mistake; a condition easily distinguished from all states of the living body. It is characterised by the peculiar odour which it occasions, and by the softening, and bluish greenish or brownish discolouration of the structures. The only appearance of the living body with which it could by any possibility be confounded is gangrene, for this too softens the tissues which it attacks, and is accompanied by a peculiar odour. The dis- tinction between the two conditions is obvious. The odour of gan- grenous parts is different from that of putrefaction: gangrene is


[112/216 b3303073x_0002_0112.jp2]

292 REAL AND APPARENT DEATH. limited, putrefaction has no precise limits: putrefaction begins for the most part in the trunk, neck, or head, gangrene generally attacks the extremities: in putrefaction there is neither tension nor redness of the parts implicated, and the cuticle is not separated from the cutis by fluid; in gangrene, on the other hand, the dead parts are separated from the living by swelling and inflammatory redness, by a distinct red line, and by a circular vesicle containing effused serum. These observations apply to moist gangrene, in contradistinction to dry gangrene, which cannot possibly be confounded with the effects of putrefaction. An eschar cannot be produced by any but a living action. This state, then, like the foregoing, does not admit of being con- founded with any appearance existing in the living or dead body, but is a certain sign of death. In examining the process of putrefaction, it will be necessary to de- seribe the changes which take place in the body from the period of the cessation of cadaveric rigidity to that of its complete decay. In the period which elapses between the extinction of life and the commence- ment of the putrefactive process, the body is falling more and more under the influence of physical laws. ‘The skin loses its elasticity, the flesh its firmness, and the blood, which was equally distributed through the body by the action of the heart and the elasticity of the arteries, now obeys the laws of gravity, and falls to the most depend- ing parts of the body. Hence results the paleness of some parts of the corpse and the deep violet tint of others, the discolourations of the back, the engorgement of the depending parts of the intestines, of the posterior part of the lungs, and of the vessels at the back part of the head. As the body is usually placed on the back, these cadaveric lividities, as they are called, are found on the posterior parts of the body and of its several organs ; but if the body be placed on the face, they will occupy the anterior part of the body and its viscera. If again, after these discolourations have formed on the back, the body be turned while still warm and before the blood has coagulated, they will disappear. These discolourations often extend uniformly over a considerable extent of the skin, but this depends entirely on the surface on which the body lies. If the surface is rough, its pro- jections will compress the parts with which they come in contact, and force out the bleod. Hence such discolourations are almost always irregular, in the form of patches, or lines, or ramifications. The pres- sure of the clothes is alone sufficient to produce these variations in colour ; so that a careless observer might mistake the marks of clothes fastened round the neck for the effect of strangulation, or isolated patches for severe bruises. Cadaveric lividity may be distinguished from the effect of injuries inflicted during life by the seat of the discolouration. On cutting into the skin, the epidermis is found colourless, the rete mucosum and vas-


[113/216 b3303073x_0002_0113.jp2]

SIGNS OF DEATH. PUTREFACTION. 293 cular membrane which lie exterior to the true skin are filled with dark blood, so that the cut surface presents a black line from which the blood may be expelled by pressure: the several layers of the dermis or true skin are white. Thus the seat of the discolouration is the mem- brane which lies between the epidermis and dermis. But in the dis- colourations of the skin which are produced by the aftlux of blood during life the tissue of the true skin is injected with blood, and exhibits when divided a number of bloody points. This, then, is the distinction between the discolourations of the skin produced during life and after death. The amount of discolouration is proportioned to the quantity of the blood which the body contains ; the general prevalence, therefore, of cadaveric lividity through the whole body will indicate the general fulness of the vascular system. On the other hand, the absence of this cadaveric lividity will indicate that a small quantity of blood exists in the body. Thus in cases of sudden death, unaccompanied by heemorrhage or effusion of blood, there will be extensive lividity ; while in death preceded or caused by hemorrhage, the skin will be remarkably pale, and present but faint traces of such discolouration. This tendency of the blood to gravitate explains its absence from the vessels of parts which have betrayed evident symptoms of inflammation during life—a fact which has long been attended to by the morbid anatomist, and must not be overlooked by the medical jurist. In addition to these discolourations produced by the blood which follows the course of the vessels, there are others due to a different cause, the transudation of the fluids. Thus the parts in immediate contact with the gall-bladder are deeply tinged with bile, which has exuded through the coats of that viscus. The aqueous parts of the humours of the eye are among the first to transude, and hence arises the dull and collapsed appearance of the cornea. The subsidence of the blood and the transudation of the fluids precede the decomposition of the body, and explain, in part at least, that relaxed and softened state of the tissues which is the first of the series of changes usually attributed to putrefaction. These fluids now undergo changes in colour, and tinge the several textures with red, brown, blue, or green discolourations, according to the degree of de- composition which they have undergone. The exudation of fluids is followed by the development of gases in the several cavities of the body, especially in the abdomen. This gives buoyancy to the bodies of the drowned, and when the formation of gas is very rapid, sometimes gives motion to the limbs and changes the position of the body. The diaphragm is thrust upwards, the blood contained in the larger vessels is forced towards the head and neck, the face swells, the eyes become prominent, and a mucous or bloody fluid flows from the mouth and nostrils. In rare instances the con- tents of the viscera are forced out, and wounds which had ceased to


[114/216 b3303073x_0002_0114.jp2]

294 REAL AND APPARENT DEATH. flow during life again pour out blood. Of old, much importance was attached to this bleeding of wounds, and questions of supposed murder were decided by the touch of the accused. If the bleeding of the wound happened to coincide with the touch of the supposed criminal, he was summarily convicted of the murder. As putrefaction advances, the cuticle becomes detached, the muscles grow viscid and pulpy, acquiring a dark greenish colour, and exhaling a highly offensive odour. Lastly, the whole texture of the body be- comes changed into a soft semi-fluid mass, that gradually loses its moisture, dries up, and forms a fibrous fatty residue, which is slowly lost in the soil. The rapidity with which these several changes take place depends greatly upon the circumstances in which the body is placed. Some- times the processes of putrefaction and decay go on very rapidly, and are soon completed ; at other times they are extended over many years. When the process of putrefaction is once established under favourable circumstances it goes on rapidly, the parts already decom- posed acting as a sort of leaven to those which still remain entire. There are a great number of conditions which materially affect the progress of putrefaction, and which ought to be known that we may form a probable guess as to the time at which death took place. These will be examined seriatim. The most important of them are the fol- lowing: a. Temperature. 6. Moisture. c. Access of air. d. Age and sex. e. Condition of the body, and cause of death. £ Period of interment. g. Place and mode of interment. a. Temperature.—Putrefaction is arrested by a temperature of 212° and of 32°; in the former case the body is reduced to dryness by the evaporation of the fluids; in the latter the fluids are congealed. The most favourable temperature is one ranging from 70° to 100°. Putre- faction, therefore, takes place more rapidly in summer than in winter, and, other things being equal, varies with the temperature, b. Moisture-—This is an essential condition, and without it putre- faction cannot begin, or, having begun, cannot continue. The body naturally contains, in all its parts, moisture enough to insure its de- composition ; but those parts which contain the largest quantity of fluid are most prone to putrefaction, e.g. the brain and eye. Dropsical subjects, again, putrefy more speedily than those which are free from accumulations of fluid. Putrefaction commences promptly in bruises and at the edges of wounds, because these injuries are accompanied by effusion of blood and other fluids. In the case of wounds, the free exposure of the injured surfaces to the air is an additional cause of rapid change. Bodies which have remained for some time in the water, and are then exposed to the air, putrefy very rapidly; much more so than those which have remained in constant contact with the air. There is one apparent exception to the rule that moisture encourages putrefaction ; it is, that this process takes place more slowly in water


[115/216 b3303073x_0002_0115.jp2]

SIGNS OF DEATH. PUTREFACTION. 295 than in the air. The reason of this is obvious. The contact of air, another condition highly favourable to putrefaction, is prevented. On the other hand, when the air is very dry, putrefaction takes place slowly, or is entirely arrested. Hence it happens that the bodies of travellers which have lain exposed in the deserts of Arabia have been discovered perfectly preserved some years after their disap- pearance. Gay Lussac preserved meat, during many months, without undergoing any change, by suspending it in a bell-glass, and absorbing the moisture by means of chloride of calcium. A rapid current of air will have the same effect as dry air. It suspends putrefaction by causing rapid evaporation. On the other hand, a moist and stagnant atmosphere encourages it, by preventing evaporation no less than by supplying the moisture which is so directly favourable to that change. c. Access of Air.—Gay Lussac thought the presence of air essential to putrefaction. Later authorities adopt a different opinion. One of these, Guntz of Leipzig, supports his own view by a decisive experiment. Having introduced his little finger into a vessel full of mercury, he pricked it, when a small drop of blood rose to the upper part of the vessel. He then exposed the apparatus to a temperature of 65°, which he gradually raised to 100°. At first, the blood coagulated; then, at the end of five days, it became liquid, of a dirty colour, almost homoge- neous, and at length bubbles of gas rose to the surface. Fragments of meat, freed as much as possible from air, being plunged under mercury, underwent the same change in vacuo. These experiments, though they prove that the presence of air is not essential to putrefaction, do not settle the question of the influence which it exerts when present. That the atmospheric air exercises a positive influence in accelerating putrefaction, may be in- ferred from the fact, that if its place be supplied by other gases, that process is materially retarded. Thus, hydrogen, carbonic acid, and nitrous acid, have been proved, by experiment, to retard putrefaction. According to Hildebrand, a portion of muscle kept in carbonic acid remained free from odour during fifty-one days. The same observation applies to nitrogen gas, which separately retards putrefaction; hence the antiseptic quality of the contents of common sewers; but when mixed with oxygen, in the proportion existing in the atmosphere, it facilitates that process. Oxygen, again, when taken separately, pro- motes putrefaction more than any other gas whatever; but when com- bined with nitrogen, as in atmospheric air, its activity is greatly increased. It appears then, that heat, moisture, and the free access of air, are the conditions most favourable to putrefaction. The two former com- bined are sufficient to develop it; but the free access of air is neces- sary to its rapid progress. In judging, therefore, of the period at which death took place, we should consider well what amount of influence each of these agents has brought to bear on the result. d. Age and Sex,—-Ceteris paribus, the bodies of children putrefy


[116/216 b3303073x_0002_0116.jp2]

296 REAL AND APPARENT DEATH, more speedily than those of adults and aged persons, and the bodies of old persons undergo this change more rapidly than those of the adult. Sex.—According to Orfila, putrefaction takes place more rapidly in females than in males. He attributes this to the greater quantity of adipose matter with which their cellular membrane is loaded. This explanation, though not quite satisfactory, agrees with the fact, that the bodies of fat persons undergo this change more readily than those of the lean and emaciated. e. Condition of the Body and Cause of Death.—On this subject no very accurate observations have been made. It appears, however, that putrefaction takes place more or less speedily in proportion as the body is more or less filled with fluid. Thus, it is more rapid in those who have died of acute than in those who have died of chronic dis- eases. Ceteris paribus, those who have died from asphyxia putrefy more speedily than those who die from hemorrhage. Putrefaction, as has been already stated, takes place more rapidly in anasarcous and dropsical persons than in others. But we must except those who die from inhaling carbonic acid ; for, from three cases mentioned by Devergie in the 17th vol. of the Annales d’Hygiéne, there can be little doubt that putrefaction is greatly retarded in this form of death. The same observation applies to the parts of the body as to the entire frame ; for those parts which are filled with fluids at the time of death (for instance, inflamed, congested, bruised, or wounded parts) putrefy more rapidly than healthy and entire structures. The fact, that those parts of the body which have sustained mecha- nical injury are the first to go into the putrefactive process, ought to be borne in mind ; for it is in parts thus injured that the process first commences, and it is in such parts that it advances the most rapidly. If called on, therefore, to examine a body some time after death, we should take care not to exaggerate the importance of any injuries which it may have sustained. It is said that the bodies of persons destroyed by poison, espe- cially by certain animal and vegetable poisons, putrefy very rapidly. Some years since, indeed, the rapid occurrence of putrefaction was looked upon as a strong evidence of poisoning. Thus, in the trial of Angus for the murder of Miss Burns, the absence of putrefaction was looked upon as a strong presumption against the administration of poison. Whatever may be the case with regard to animal and vege- table poisons, there is now sufficient evidence that mineral poisons (at least the most important of them, arsenic) have no effect in promoting putrefaction, but, on the contrary, that they act as powerful antiseptics. Some striking instances of arsenic detected in the body many years after death, in consequence of the preservative influence of this poison on the parts. with which it was in immediate contact, will be men- tioned under the head of poisoning by arsenic. f. Period of Interment.—A body putrefies much more speedily in air than in the ground. Hence the longer the period which elapses ——


[117/216 b3303073x_0002_0117.jp2]

SIGNS OF DEATH. PUTREFACTION. 297 before interment, the greater the changes produced in it by the pu- trefactive process. Thus, Orfila observes, that if, during the sum- mer, a body be kept exposed for five or six days, and then interred, it may be found at the end of a month, to have undergone as much change as it would have done at the end of seven months, if it had been interred at once. g. Place and Mode of Interment.—In dry elevated. situations, pu- trefaction goes on slowly ; in low swampy grounds, rapidly. A dry absorbent soil retards, a moist one accelerates, putrefaction. The nature of the soil exercises an important influence. In sand or gravel the change goes on slowly, and adipocere is rarely met with. In marl or clay, and in loose mould, especially that which is impregnated with animal or vegetable matter, more quickly (except peat, which clearly retards putrefaction). The deeper the grave, ceteris paribus, the slower the putrefaction. The more completely the body is defended from the air by clothes or coffin, the more slowly does putrefaction go on. It is rapid where the body is exposed to the soil, but very slow where it is buried in a coffin hermetically sealed. It would occupy too much space were we to enter into more minute details on this subject of putrefaction. For further particulars the reader is referred to Orfila’s admirable work entitled, “ Traité des Exhuma- tions Juridiques,” where this subject is treated at great length, or to Devergie’s “ Médicine Légale,” which contains the marrow of Orfila’s observations, with his own account of the changes produced by putre- faction in the water. From the extensive opportunities which an offi- cial situation at the Morgue afforded him, Devergie has been enabled to treat this part of the subject of putrefaction with the same success with which Orfila has handled that of putrefaction in the air and in the earth. It may be well to premise, that the several media retard putrefac- tion in the following order :— 1. Water of common sewers and cesspools. 2. Common water. 3. The earth (in different degrees according to the character of the soil). 4. The air (in different degrees according to its temperature, moisture, &amp;c.). Putrefaction in Water.—More dependence is to be placed on the criteria laid down for determining the period of death in those whose bodies have remained in the water, than in those who have been ex- posed to the air or interred. The reason of this is obvious. The temperature of the water is more uniform, and its close contact with every part of the body excludes the most sensible of the influences which are brought to bear on bodies exposed to the air or buried in the soil. As Devyergie places much reliance on the signs by which the period of death is determined in the drowned, it may be well to subjoin his description of the successive changes which occur. Three to Four Days.—Cadaverous rigidity, loss of animal heat, extinc- tion of muscular irritability, epidermis of the hand beginning to bleach. Be


[118/216 b3303073x_0002_0118.jp2]

298 REAL AND APPARENT DEATH. Four to Hight Days.—All parts of the body supple, extinction of muscular irritability, colour of the skin natural, skin of the palms of the hands very white. Hight to Twelve Days.—All the parts of the body flaccid, epidermis of the back of the hand beginning to bleach, the face softened and be- ginning to exhibit a pale appearance different from the skin of the rest of the body. About Fifteen Days.—Face slightly swollen, here and there red ; greenish tint of the middle portion of the sternum ; epidermis of the hands and feet uniformly white, and beginning to wrinkle. About One Month.—Face brownish red, eyelids and lips green ; a reddish-brown spot, surrounded by a greenish tint at the anterior part of the chest ; epidermis of the hands and feet white, and wrinkled as if by the application of a poultice. About Two Months—Face generally brownish and swollen; the hairs but slightly adherent; a great part of the epidermis of the hands and feet detached ; nails still attached to the skin. Two Months and a Half.—Epidermis and nails of the hands de- tached ; epidermis of the feet detached, but the nails still adherent. In the female, reddish discolouration of the sub-cutaneous cellular tissue of the neck, of that which surrounds the trachea, and of the or- gans contained in the cavity of the chest ; partial saponification of the cheeks and chin ; superficial saponification of the mamma, the axillee, and the anterior part of the thighs. Three Months and a Half.—Destruction of a part of the hairy scalp, of the eyelids, and of the nose; partial saponification of the face, of the upper part of the neck and axille ; corrosions and de- struction of the skin in various parts of the body; epidermis and nails of the hands and feet completely removed. Four Months and a Half:—Nearly total saponification of the fat of the face, of the neck, of the axille, and of the anterior part of the thighs ; commencing earthy incrustation of the thighs; incipient sa- ponification of the anterior part of the brain ; opaline state of the greater part of the skin ; almost entire separation and destruction of the hairy scalp ; calvarium denuded and beginning to be very friable. As to the more remote periods no accurate approximations can be given. To this detailed account Devergie adds, that the signs here laid . down have been repeatedly applied with complete success to bodies which have remained in the water during periods unknown at the time of their examination. It is necessary to bear in mind that these observations of Devergie are made on bodies immersed during winter and spring, and that bodies immersed in summer undergo the same changes much more rapidly. Thus, 5 to 8 hours of immersion in summer correspond to 3 to 5 days in winter; 24 hours to 4 to 8 days; 48 hours to 8 to 12 days ; 4 days to 15 days. Thus on the average the same changes in


[119/216 b3303073x_0002_0119.jp2]

PUTREFACTION IN WATER. ADIPOCERE. 299 summer take place from three to five or six times as rapidly as in win- ter, or even more promptly than that. The changes in spring are — intermediate between those of winter and summer. To this account of the changes which take place in those who have remained long in the water, must be added that development of gas which plays so important a part in giving buoyancy to the body, and thus raising it to the surface. This takes place slowly in winter, and the body rarely rises to the surface in less than six weeks to two months. The same change takes place in summer from the 14th to the 16th day, or even earlier.* Frequent mention has been made of adipocere. This curious sub- stance was first examined and well described by Fourcroy, on the occasion of the exhumations practised at Paris during the years 1785, 1786, and 1787, and subsequently analyzed by M. Chevreul. It is of a yellowish white colour, and has the physical characters of a com- pound of wax and fat, from which circumstance it has acquired the name of adipocere. It is formed in the following way :—The fat of the body becomes slowly converted into the margaric and oleic acids, which uniting with the ammonia generated during decomposition, form a sort of animal soap. Adipocere is formed in bodies which re- main for a long time in water, also in bodies buried in moist soils, and especially where a large number of bodies have been interred in one common grave. A body must remain about three years in the ground in order that it may be completely transformed, but the change takes place much more rapidly in water. There is still another point requiring attention before concluding the subject of putrefaction. Under the head of Infanticide (p. 134), an instance is given of incipient putrefaction with a large development of gas on the surface of the lungs, where the peculiar odour of putrefac- tion, softening of the tissues, and change of colour, were altogether wanting. This appearance is comparatively rare, and not having been recognized as incipient putrefaction, gave rise to the curious theory of emphysema occurring in lungs which had never received air, and added an unfounded objection to the hydrostatic test. This early formation of gas (probably carbonic acid) takes place occasionally be- neath the membranes of the brain, and possibly in other situations. It is a fact of some importance. * Devergie, Médicine Légale, vol. i. p. 95.


[120/216 b3303073x_0002_0120.jp2]

SUDDEN DEATH. 300 Proximate Causes of Sudden Death.— Death commencing in the Hzart.— Syncope. —In the Hnav.—Asthenia.—In the-LUNGs.— Apnea (Asphyaia). — Causes of:—Symptoms.— Post-Mortem &lt;Ap- pearances.— Theory of.— Post-Mortem Appearances in the Three Modes of Death contrasted. — Frequency of Cases of Sudden Death. — Number of Cases due to each Cause. A temporary suspension of the heart’s action constitutes the chief sign and the essence of apparent death ; a total arrest of its contractions is real death. Some of the vital endowments of the blood and muscles survive this cessation of the heart’s action ; and the lingering irritability of the heart itself, and especially of the right auricle, forms our ground of hope in the use of means of resuscitation. This suspen- sion or total arrest of the heart’s action, or, in other words, apparent or real death, may be brought about in two different ways. 1. The heart itself may be paralysed, in consequence of a violent shock sustained by the nervous system, as in death by lightning, by heavy blows on the head, and by strong and sudden emotions, as of fear and joy. 2. The heart may cease to act in consequence of one or both of its cavities receiving a quantity of blood too small to excite them to con- traction: this happens in death by hemorrhage, and in the several forms of death by asphyxia. Again, the blood may be mixed with some foreign. substance, or so altered in quality as to be unfit to excite the heart to contraction : thus the introduction of air into the veins will cause a sudden arrest of the heart’s action, and the same result follows some of the more active poisons, when introduced directly into the circulation. In the first of these modes of death, the immediate cause of death has no antecedent, but the shock to the nervous system is directly fol- lowed by paralysis of the heart. The same remark applies to the second division of the second class of causes, viz. blood changed in quality ; for the introduction of a certain quantity of air into one of the large veins near the heart, or the admixture with the blood of a small quantity of an active poison, such as the upas antiar, will put an im- mediate stop to the heart’s action. In the cases of paralysis of the heart produced by severe shocks to the nervous system, every part of the organ is probably paralysed at.the same time, but the action of air or poison may be supposed to be confined to the right side. In paralysis of the heart, also, from a deficient supply of ‘its natural stimulus, the effect is either immediate and upon all its cavities alike, as in hemorrhage ; or the effect is only upon the left side of the heart, as in the form of death improperly termed asphyxia. Now this latter state is brought about by two distinct causes, impediments to the res- a


[121/216 b3303073x_0002_0121.jp2]

301 TABLE OF THE PROXIMATE CAUSES OF SUDDEN DEATH. ‘FOYIO OY} PUL OO OT] WodMyod ooMarayIp [eIFWOSse OU ST OLY} FEUF pue ‘ssuny oy} [Snosyy ATooUTOI aroUL pur ‘moss snoarou oy} ySnoayy Apoorrp “skvm qourystp OM UT FT] Sorjsep pue qavoy oy} yooye Avut pvoy oy} ye SuTUULseq YIVep WU} Woes oq [ITAL IT roy —‘shun) oy ye Suruutseq yop puv “7.unaY aly) ye Suruutseq yywep “ppay oy} ye SaTUUIs0q YVop “ZlIA—yerpig, Fo WONBOYTsse[) OY} TEI yooI109 a10UL ST pue ‘sesnvo aJOULaL oY} JO SNOLAGO pue o[dus oIoW oY} pure “YyveP Jo sosMwO oyeurtxord Io oyeIpouUT ot} squesord OWeYs Stl J, “pooyqd oy} oJUT poonporyur suostog Y* * * * poor ‘SUIOA Of} OJUT poonposzuT ary § Jo Ayyenb poroypy "tloryertdsoyy pepodu wong f° * vaoudy ; : es * © 4reoy oT} : BYVSUO[GO Jo ‘erxfyd Jo pls eT eu) OF, aooTa eMpeyT yt -sy Aq qyeeq ; HHL HONOUHL °% : a 0} Ainfur Wor] + 1 &gt; poojqi so MLVval jo Ajddns yuoryod oseyisouleyT Y° .* * * JOT Nadas Aq yyeod, § oy} Jo septs qI0q OL, ‘uoTJOUS TeyUOM SuoIys Ag 5 "sOOYS [RUOTINITISUOD oIoAos KE eee "peoy ayy wo smoyg oroa0s A (Oe oO nouHE “4 “Suruyy st] Ag ‘TTostT JIvoY OY} Jo sornqdns puv spunom “yop Jo SosMV IY} OF PPL OF Aresso00u Syorour st 41 ojo[duroo yx Aepuor OJ, “Yjvop Jo sopour [eIOA0S osoy} OOULIS B YB UAIYX TILA ouToyoS SULMOT[OF 2 I ee ised a id,  SUep Fone Oper ul I egy” Ut} { TAOTLOF SUL , “TOYO OY} UL ULY} SUD OLLO OY FUT SNOJMIALD sso] ST ssoooid oy} qnq Soules oY} ST Sosvo YJOq UL yoo oyvUIy[N oT, “p40 jeurds oy3 Jo qavd roddn to wiviq oyy Jo asvq OY} 07 Sorm{yt pue 4soyo oy} jo soyoriud oy} uo ATfvotURyooEUL Suryow JO “soaposwoyy souny pur saSussud av oy} ut Suysixe ‘uoyead


[122/216 b3303073x_0002_0122.jp2]

302 SUDDEN DEATH. For practical purposes, however, the classification of Bichat may be usefully adopted, and the several forms of sudden death may be ex- amined in turn, as commencing at the heart, at the head, and at the lungs. Sudden Death commencing at the Heart.—Syncope.-—The most com- mon forms of death belonging to this class are, rupture of the heart itself, and hemorrhage, and these modes of death are characterised by the term syzcope. The phenomena which attend this form of death are familiar to all observers—pallor of the face and lips, cold sweats, dizziness, dim- ness of vision, dilated pupils, gasping and sighing respiration, a slow, weak, and irregular pulse ; to which are sometimes added nausea and vomiting, restlessness and tossing of the limbs, transient delirium and convulsions. On inspecting the body, the vessels generally will be found to contain but little blood, and the heart to be nearly or quite empty, and contracted. This empty state of all the cavities of the heart contrasts strongly with their distended state in the rare cases of death originat- ing in the brain, and acting directly upon the heart ; and not less strongly with the distended condition of the right side of the heart, and empty state of the left, which occurs in death from asphyxia. Sudden. Death commencing at the Head.—On referring to the table, it will be seen that there are two ways in which injuries to the ner- vous centres may affect the heart, and put a stop to its contractions: the one acts directly upon the heart, the other first affects the function of respiration by paralyzing the respiratory muscles. When the heart is directly affected, the circulation is, as it were, arrested and fixed in what may be termed its normal state, each side of the heart containing its due proportion of blood, and all the cavities being distended from the sudden loss of power in the heart to propel its contents. This mode of death has been designated asthenia. When, on the contrary, the muscles of respiration are paralysed, the post-mortem appearances will be those presently to be described under the head of asphyxia. Sudden Death commencing at the Lungs: Apnea (Asphyxia). As this form of death is one which will have to be frequently considered in the next chapter, it demands a somewhat lengthened description. The sense affixed to the term asphyxia departs strangely from the original derivation of the word, which means, pulselessness. ‘This is not its present signification, for if it were, it would be synonymous with syncope. It is now understood to mean real or apparent death primarily produced by a suspension of the function of respiration,—a mode of death much more aptly designated by the term apnea, which term will accordingly be preferred in these pages. Apnoea may be produced by a great variety of causes, which it may be well to specify in this place. They are as follows :— 1. Cessation of the action of the muscles of Respiration. 2. Cessa- tion of the action of the Lungs themselves. 3. Exclusion of the atmo- spheric air from the Lungs.


[123/216 b3303073x_0002_0123.jp2]

BEGINNING .AT THE LUNGS. APNGA. 303 1. Cessation of the Action of the Muscles of Respiration may be due to inertia of the muscles themselves, in consequence of cold or debility ; to a loss of nervous influence supplied to the muscles, as from division of the upper portion of the spinal marrow, or of the pneumogastric and phrenic nerves, or from the lightning stroke ; to mechanical restraint, as by pressure on the chest or abdomen; or to tonic spasm, as in death from Tetanus or Hydrophobia. 2. Cessation of the Action of the Lungs. This may be due to a division of the eighth pair of nerves; or to a mechanical obstacle, as by the admission of air into the pleura, or the entrance of the vis- cera of the abdomen through a wound in the diaphragm. 3. The partial or complete Exclusion of Atmospheric Air from the Lungs may be brought about by the entire absence of air, as in a va- cuum; or by its extreme rarefaction, as on the top of very lofty mountains. The air, again, may be mechanically excluded, as by a foreign body introduced into the larynx, by submersion, by suffoca- tion, by strangulation, by suspension ; or lastly, the place of the atmo- spheric air may be taken by a gas, which acts merely by excluding it. These gases are, nitrogen, protoxide of nitrogen, and hydrogen. The remainder of the gases seem to exercise a deleterious influence on the ceconomy, independent of the mere exclusion of the air. Some of these are intensely irritating, as the sulphurous acid gas, chlorine, and am- monia; others, though less irritating, are not less fatal in their effects, such as the carbonic acid, carbonic oxide, carburetted hydrogen, nitrous acid, hydrosulphuric acid, hydrosulphate of ammonia, the arseniuretted hydrogen, and the vapour of hydrocyanie acid. There is reason to believe that some of these, as well as the more simply irritant gases, act mechanically by producing a spasm of the glottis, and closing it against the admission of air. To this list of the causes of apnoea may be added certain diseases of the lungs, as hepatization, cedema, &amp;c., which prove fatal by filling the air-cells, and preventing the process of respiration from being duly performed. These causes possess no interest or importance for the medical jurist. The symptoms of apncea will be more or less strongly marked according as the asphyxiating cause acts suddenly or slowly. If the atmospheric air is suddenly excluded from the lungs, as by mechanical compression of the trachea, or the inhalation of a gas which is so irri- tating as to cause spasmodic contraction of the glottis, the symptoms are strongly marked, and run a rapid course. The sufferer struggles violently for breath, and uses strong efforts to remove the obstruction. The face at first flushes, and soon grows turgid and livid ; the veins of the head and neck swell; and the eye- balls start from their sockets. This extreme distress is soon followed by sensations of an agreeable kind, by giddiness, with visions of bril- liant circles of colours before the eyes. ‘To this succeed loss of con- sciousness, convulsive movements of the limbs, and relaxation of the


[124/216 b3303073x_0002_0124.jp2]

304 ° ; SUDDEN’ DEATH. sphincters. These symptoms occupy but two or three minutes, and if relief be not afforded, life is soon extinct beyond recovery. When the asphyxiating cause acts more slowly, the symptoms are somewhat modified, and succeed each other at longer intervals. ‘There is a greater or less impediment to the respiration, and a feel- ing of constriction in the chest, from which the sufferer strives to free himself by strong voluntary efforts to inspire air, or by involuntary efforts, such as yawning or sighing. These efforts to respire are fol- lowed by a sense of heaviness and dull pain in the head, especially over the forehead. The want of air is now more strongly felt, and the patient is in a state of extreme anguish. Then follow in succession dimness of sight, torpor of the intellectual faculties, and of all the sen- sations, vertigo, and loss of voluntary motion. Still, the functions of respiration and circulation continue; but the former consists merely in almost imperceptible movements of the parietes of the chest, and the lat- ter of pulsations of the heart, which are scarcely sensible to the hand. The arterial pulse, if it can be felt, is extremely feeble. This imperfect state of respiration and circulation is followed by the entire cessation of those functions, and by complete loss of motion, voluntary and in- voluntary. It is at this point of time that the fulness of the capillary system begins to show itself, by the injected state of the face, and by a deep violet discolouration of that part, which also extends to the hands and feet. Some portions of the trunk and extremities exhibit spots, more or less extensive, of the same colour. At length, the ca- pillary circulation ceases, and the state of asphyxia is complete, dis- tinguished only from the state of death by the presence of animal heat, and the absence of rigidity. Such are the usual symptoms of apneea; but there are some cases in which the asphyxiating cause, acting more slowly still, seems to induce a sleep which terminates, without suffering, in death ; in other instances, the sufferer is suddenly roused from a state of torpor to a vivid and painful perception of his state: he makes a violent effort to escape from the death which threatens him, attempts to leave the spot, but finds his muscular strength unequal to the accomplishment of his purpose, and falls to the ground, With regard to the duration of apneea, this will of course depend on the intensity of the asphyxiating cause, and the degree in which it prevents or impedes respiration. As a general rule, we may state, that the more slowly and gradually it takes place, the longer does the chance of recovery last, and vice vers’. We may perhaps safely conclude that when the respiration is entirely prevented, death will phyxiating cause. The appearances which the body presents after death from apnoea are the following: There is a rosy, bright red, or violet discolouration, ‘ either on the face or on other parts of the body. This discolouration is distinguished from cadaverous lividity by being situated as much on 5 &gt; hppa Sia eee


[125/216 b3303073x_0002_0125.jp2]

DEATH FROM APN@A. POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES, = 305 \ that the situation of the discoloured ‘spots cannot be explained by the position in which the body may happen to have been placed after death. The seat of the discolouration is the mucous tissue of the skin, but it sometimes extends to the dermis, so that when we make an incision into it, blood issues from the vessels, and gives the mem- brane a dotted appearance. The eyes are usually prominent, firm, and brilliant. The mouth is sometimes expressive of calmness, at. others of suffering. Cadaveric rigidity is very marked, and continues for along time. The venous system of the brain is commonly full of blood, but its substance presents, when divided, but few bloody points. Sometimes the ventricles of the brain contain serum ; sometimes blood is effused at the base or in the substance of the organ. The base of the tongue is almost always injected, and its papille are here strongly developed. The mucous membrane which covers the larynx and epiglottis is of a red colour, and this colour is confined to the mu- of the trachea is of a deep red, and the colour increases in intensity as we approach the last ramifications of the air-tubes. On the surface of the membrane we often encounter a frothy sanguinolent fluid analo- gous to that expectorated in hemoptysis. The discolouration of the mucous membrane of the trachea extends to the fibrous tissue which unites the cartilaginous rings, so as to form a striking contrast with the whiteness of the rings themselves. The lungs are very voluminous, projecting over and concealing the pericardium, and sometimes, on the division of the mediastinum, folding over each other. Their colour is a blackish brown, and their parenchyma red. When they are com- pressed, large drops of black, thick, liquid blood exude. The liver, the spleen, and the kidneys, are also gorged with blood, which, as in the lungs, exudes on pressure. The veins of the heart are distinctly traced upon its surface, its right cavities are distended, gorged with black blood, thick, but liquid, or rarely coagulated. The venz cavze and their principal branches are also gorged with blood; but the left cavities of the heart are found empty, or containing but a small quan- tity of blood. Such are the appearances present in death by asphyxia, when carried to an eatreme degree, and they are those observed in the bodies of persons who have perished by inhaling carbonic acid. But it must not be supposed that all these appearances are present in every case, or, if present, that they are equally marked in all. The description is a general one, and like all such descriptions must be ap- plied with some reserve. It is usual, in works on Forensic Medicine, to enter into a minute inquiry concerning the proximate cause of death from apnoea —to discuss the theory of apnea ; and, as in the table already given such a theory is assumed, a few observations on this subject may not be misplaced. Theory of Apnea ( Asphyaxia).—It is admitted on all hands, that when


[126/216 b3303073x_0002_0126.jp2]

306 SUDDEN DEATH. the air is prevented from gaining access to the lungs, the blood does not undergo its usual change from venous to arterial, and it is equally admitted that venous blood does not minister to the support of the vital functions of the several organs so completely as the arterial blood does. Some, indeed, suppose that venous blood is a positive poison ; and that it is much worse for an organ to be supplied exclusively with venous blood than to receive no blood at all. Assuming that venous blood is positively noxious to the several textures of the body—that it prevents the continuance of their several functions,—how shall we ex- plain that cessation of the heart’s.action which constitutes the direct cause, the immediate forerunner, of death? By what means is the heart paralysed ? The heart is a muscle, and venous blood circulating through the substance of a muscle is assumed to destroy its functions, Now, ve- nous blood circulates through the coronary arteries in place of arterial blood. Hence the heart may be directly paralysed. Another theory is, that the venous blood is unfitted to excite the left cavities of the heart to contraction, and that its motions are there- fore suspended. This theory of Goodwyn has been disproved by Bichat. Again, the heart is excited to contraction by nervous influ- ence, and, according to the assumption already mentioned, nervous influence is suspended when venous blood circulates through the nerves in place of arterial. Hence Bichat explains the paralysis of the heart by the circulation of black blood through the brain. Now, either of these theories (that which attributes the paralysis of the heart directly to the circulation of black blood through its muscular structure, or that which attributes it to the more remote influence of the nerves) goes on the assumption, that venous blood is directly poi- sonous, and worse than no blood at all. This assumption has been disproved, as far as it can be, by experiment. Kay has shown that the venous blood exercises no deleterious influence on the muscles, by comparing the contractility of a limb from which the supply of arterial blood has been cut off with that of a limb supplied exclusively with venous blood.* What is proved to be true of a limb seems to hold good of the whole body; for the same author has shown that it is as bad for a rabbit to have its wéndpipe tied as to have its aorta secured close to the heart ; and Edwards has gone still further in his experi- ments on the cold-blooded animals, for he has found that such an ani- mal placed in an asphyxiating medium lives longer than one whose heart and bulb of the aorta have been excised. Venous blood, therefore, is not positively, or to a great degree, injurious ; its circulation is merely a negative injury, and destructive of life by occupying the place of arterial blood and cutting off the * Kay on Asphyxia, p, 151. Tt De l’Influence des Agens Physiques sur la Vie, par W. F. Edwards, M.D.


[127/216 b3303073x_0002_0127.jp2]

7. —— RELATIVE FREQUENCY OF ITS DIFFERENT FORMS, 307 supply of that fluid to the economy. As the absence of all circula- tion through the vessels of the heart, or through those of the brain, or through the nerves supplying the heart with vital stimulus, would certainly and speedily prove fatal to life, so would the mechanical exclusion of arterial blood from the vessels of these parts, whether by warm water or by venous blood. This theory of exclusion, then, will answer as well at least as the one just alluded to. It has been shown, however, by Dr. Kay, that neither of these theories is the true one, but that the essential character of this form of death consists in the accumulation of blood in the lungs, and a constantly diminished supply of that fluid to the left cavities of the heart; so that the quantity of blood sent out for the supply of the system con- stantly diminishes, till at length the circulation is altogether arrested, Hence in death by asphyxia the left ventricle is found contracted, and nearly or altogether empty. It is of little consequence to inquire into the proximate cause of this arrest of the circulation through the lungs ; the fact is all with which, as medical jurists, we have to do. On contrasting the post-mortem appearances proper to the three modes of death, syncope, asthenia, and apnoea (asphyxia), it will be seen, that in the first, all the cavities of the heart are empty or contain little blood ; in the second, all the cavities are full of blood ; and in the third, the right side is gorged with blood, while the left ventricle contains little or none. It is most important, however, that the medical jurist should bear in mind that the characteristic appearances of sudden death, due pri- marily to the heart, the lungs, or the brain, are not always equally marked; that they may be combined with each other in ditferent pro- portions ; and that a cause usually productive of the one may, in cer- tain circumstances, give rise to the other. Thus, a person may be threatened with suffocation (one of the causes of asphyxia), and appre- hension may give rise to sudden syncope; or a violent attempt to es- cape the threatened injury may burst a blood-vessel in the brain, and cause apoplexy. We must, therefore, bear in mind the possibility of such combinations as these, in order that we may be prepared to un- derstand the different appearances presented by those who perish from a common cause, and to act with becoming caution when we have to discharge the duties of the medical jurist. It may be useful to subjoin the following facts connected with sud- den death. From the Registrar-General’s Report of Births, Deaths, and Mar- riages for 1839, it appears that of 331,007 deaths from all causes, occurring in the year, 3012 were cases of sudden death, being 1 in 109 deaths. Of these 1840 were males and 1172 females, being in the proportion of about 18 to 12, or 3 to 2. The relative frequency of the several forms of sudden death appears, from a work of Ferrario and Sormoni on sudden deaths occurring in Milan, to be as follows :—


[128/216 b3303073x_0002_0128.jp2]

308 SURVIVORSHIP. Head (including apoplexy, cerebral concussion, vertigo, and coma), 879 Heart (including diseases of the heart, angina pectoris, aneurism, and hemorrhage), : ; : 150 Lungs(including asphyxia, suffocative catarrh, and pulmonary apoplexy ), : : . (14 Difficult gue 5, making i in ail 1048 c cases. SURVIVORSHIP. Probabilities afforded by Age and Sex irrespective of the Mode of Death.—Mother and Child.—Probabilities established by the Mode of Death. — Apnea.— Drowning. — Suffocation. — Cold.—Heat.— Hun- ger and Thirst.—Other Modes of Death. When two or more persons die by the same accident, a question sometimes arises as to which died first. In certain cases the succes- sion to property would be secured on proof of survivorship even for an instant of time. Hence the importance of the question. Questions of survivorship are by no means of rare occurrence, and the more voluminous works on Forensic Medicine, in all languages, abound with examples. As our law lays down no positive rules for the decision of this class of cases, more than usual importance attaches to medical evidence. Hitherto little has been done towards establish- ing broad general principles applicable to this class of inquiries : indeed. the materials for the establishment of such principles are wanting. It is proposed, therefore, to state as briefly as possible some of the more accurate results which have been attained. The subject is best examined under the following heads:—l. Of the probabilities afforded by age and sex, irrespective of the mode of death. 2. Of the degree in which such probability is affected by the peculiar mode of death. 1. Of the Probabilities afforded by Age and Sex. Age.—As the body is at its maximum of strength and vigour at about 27 years of age, or from 25 to 30*, and continues in possession of its strength up to about 50 years, there will be no sufficient ground for in- ferring survivorship in the case of adults of the same sex, whose age ranges between these extreme points, and where the form of death is one in which mere strength of frame and power of endurance is concerned. Before and after the ages specified, the strength and power of endur- ance will be less, but still within the limits of puberty and old age (say 15 and 60 years) the difference will be too slight to justify any general rule. The probability of survivorship, in the case of a middle- aged adult perishing with one under puberty or above 60, will be in * Quetelet’s observations show, that the body does not generally attain its full stature till 27 years.


[129/216 b3303073x_0002_0129.jp2]

PROBABILITIES ESTABLISHED BY THE MODE OF DEATH. 309 favour of the adult. In the case of one under 15 and one above 60 perishing together, the French law assumes that the former survived ; when both are under 15, that the elder outlived the younger. Ac- cording to the civil law of England, if parent and child perish by a common death, the child shall be presumed to have survived if above puberty, and to have died first if under puberty. In the case of mother and child both dying in childbed, the presump- tion is, that the mother survived, for there is a prima facie probability of still birth, and a still stronger probability that a woman perishing in child-bed will be unable to render to her child the assistance necessary for its preservation. It is probable, therefore, that the death of the child would precede that of the mother. A large child would be still more likely to perish first, for it has been elsewhere stated that still-born children greatly exceed in size and weight those born alive. If there is an opportunity of examining the body, the presumption may be still further strengthened by the external marks of a difficult labour, or the absence of the signs of respiration. Legal decisions have not been always in conformity with the principle here laid down. Sex.—If one of either sex perish by a common accident, it may be inferred that the male, being the stronger, is the survivor; but this tule applies only to modes of death in which strength and courage give the best chance of safety. On the other hand, females being subject to prolonged faintings in consequence of fright, may be, by that very circumstance, incapacitated from those struggles which in so many forms of death may be presumed to increase danger. When, then, there is safety in exertion, the probability of survivorship will be with the male; where passive endurance or insensibility would tend to lessen the danger, with the female. The subject of temperament is too indefinite to admit of any general rules being laid down with regard to it. It is necessary, however, to understand that mere muscular strength and power of endurance are two very distinct things, and do not often meet in the same person. Muscular strength is often greatest in the so-called lymphatic tempera- ment ; power of endurance in the bilious. 2. Of the Degree in which the foregoing Probabilities are affected by the Mode of Death. Under this head it is proposed to specify some of the more common modes of death, and to endeavour to establish some general principles with respect to them, assuming, as before, that the parties about whom the question is raised are placed, as nearly as may be, in the same circumstances. Apnea (Asphyxia).—Females consume less oxygen than men ; the same quantity of air, therefore, will last them fora longer time. Hence, of adult males and females perishing together of apnoea, the females may be presumed to have survived. In poisoning by carbonic acid gas, which is nearly allied to death by apnoea, the chances of survivorship


[130/216 b3303073x_0002_0130.jp2]

310 SURVIVORSHIP. are with the female. This statement rests on the authority of a large number of facts. In 19out of 360 cases of asphyxia by carbonic acid, which took place in Paris during 1834 and 1835, a man and woman were asphyxiated together ; of these three only were saved, and these three were females. In solitary cases of the same form of death the result is also favourable to the female; for 18 out of 73 females were restored, and only 19 out of 83 males, so that the chances for the female and male respectively are nearly as 15 and 14 (instead of 5 and 4 as Devergie represents it).* Single cases are in strict conformity with this result. Thus, in a case quoted by Beck from the Transyl- vania Journal, a man and his wife were exposed in a small room to the gas from live coals. The man was found dead, rigid, and con- tracted, but the woman was still breathing and recovered. Again, in a case reported by M. Sardaillon, a man, his wife, and their child aged seven years were asphyxiated in a porter’s lodge. The child died, the father was very ill and with difficulty restored to life, while the wife was well enough to call for help and to assist both husband and child. In these cases it would be necessary to take into account the position which the parties occupied in the room, whether on the bed or on the floor, near or remote from an open window, &amp;c. Drowning.—There are many complicated considerations connected with this mode of death. In shipwrecks men are more likely to be in a favourable situation for saving themselves, as they are more on deck than women; they also in many instances are able to swim, or to save themselves by clinging to portions of the wreck, and they are less encumbered by clothing. When the comparison is between men similarly exposed and capable of the same exertion, it may be neces- sary to inquire whether one was more exposed to cold by having the body half immersed, whilst the other was more under water. Search should also be made for severe injuries which may have prevented the swimmer from using his strength, or may have otherwise proved fatal. Death from apoplexy is stated by Devergie to be sooner fatal than by apncea, while in death by syncope there is the best chance of recovery. Suffocation.— In all cases of suffocation depending upon an insuffi- cient quantity of air, or upon air rendered partially unfit for respira- tion, it may be presumed that those who require least air live the longest—women longer than men, children than adults. In suffocation from the falling of houses or earth, or by mechanical means in general, the stronger may be presumed to survive the weaker—men, women ; adults, children and old persons. Cold.—The experiments of Edwards show that young children bear cold worse than adults ; hence the probability of survivorship in ex- posure to the same degree of cold is in favour of the latter. Men bear cold better than women, adults better than the aged. Here it is necessary to take into account the clothing of the persons exposed, and * Devergie, Médicine Légale, Art. Survie. _


[131/216 b3303073x_0002_0131.jp2]

HEAT. HUNGER AND THIRST. 3ll their state of health. Spirituous liquors in excess increase the effect of cold ; in moderation they give increased tolerance of it. Heat.—The young and old, as they suffer more from cold, so do they bear heat better. The relative tolerance of heat of the two sexes is not well ascertained. Foderé relates the case of an English- man and his daughter aged seven years, who, in the year 1814, crossed the desert of Syria to the Persian Gulf. Both rode on camels, and were placed in precisely similar circumstances, but the father died, while the child arrived in safety at its journey’s end. Hunger and Thirst.—Those who have not reached their full growth require more nourishment than adults, and adults than aged persons. The aged, then, may be presumed to survive both, and the adult to live longer than the child. Corpulent persons are thought to bear hunger better than the emaciated. In death from starvation, those who have the freest access to water may be presumed to live the longest. Those who use the greatest exertions will suffer earliest in this as in the foregoing modes of death. Those who possess most passive endurance may be expected to live the longest. Such are some of the principal forms of death, in which the circum- stances of the several victims are likely to be so similar as to admit of the application of general rules. In other modes of death, and in these under certain circumstances, there may be no points admitting of strict comparison, and many things which may exercise a marked influence on the result will have to be taken into the account. The reader will find several such cases quoted by Beck,* but as they throw little ight upon the general question, and establish no fixed principles, it would be useless to quote them in this place. It has been suggested by more than one writer, that a distinct enactment would be preferable to the present custom of deciding each case on its own merits. Such an enactment, extending to that large class of cases in which the circumstances of the death are but im- perfectly known, and those in which it is in the very nature of things impossible to come to a correct decision, is certainly much to be de- sired. On many points, as it has been seen, the opinions of medical men can throw much light, and their researches lead to general princi- ples admitting of tolerably safe application. * Med, Jur. p. 387.


[132/216 b3303073x_0002_0132.jp2]

312 CHAPTER VIII. ‘DEATH BY DROWNING.— HANGING.— STRANGULATION.— SUFFOCATION. Turse modes of death are thrown together in the same chapter from the near resemblance which they bear to each other. They are all forms of apnoea, or sudden death beginning at the lungs, and naturally follow close upon the subject of sudden death, and of this, one of its most common forms. DEATH BY DROWNING. Causes of Death.— Different in Different Cases.—Death from Apnea. —From Syncope.—From Concussion of the Brain.— From Apopleay. —F rom Syncope supervening on Apnoeea.—Post-Mortem Appearances. —Did Death take place by Drowning ?—Value of the several Signs of Death by Drowning.— Water in the Stomach—in the Lungs.—Mu- cous Froth in the A-passages.— Was the Drowning Accidental, Sui- cidal, or Homicidal ?—Marks of Violence. Although death from drowning is very properly regarded as a form of apncea, or asphyxia, it is not always so; and when it is due to this cause, the appearances are not in all cases the same in degree, though they are in kind. Hence the subject of drowning is not quite so simple as it would at first sight appear to be. ‘To make it intelligible it will be necessary to describe the various modes in which a man found in the water may have come by his death, supposing him to have died in the water. A man in the perfect possession of all his faculties falls into the water. He sinks to a greater or less depth according to the depth of the water itself, and the height of the point from which he falls. He immediately rises to the surface again, and, if he is a swimmer, ex- hausts himself by efforts to save his life, and comes at length to the condition of one who cannot swim at all; with this difference, that he has already exhausted his strength by swimming, whilst the other has all his strength reserved for the death-struggles which are common to both. These struggles consist of irregular movements of the arms and legs, and graspings of the hand at all objects within reach, whether floating in the water or fixed at the bottom of it. In the course of these irregular movements he rises repeatedly to the surface, makes an effort to respire, and takes in air and water. The contact of the water _ with the larynx causes a cough, by which a part of the fluid is re- jected, and with it, of course, a portion of the air contained in the


[133/216 b3303073x_0002_0133.jp2]

DIFFERENT FORMS OF DEATH BY DROWNING. 313 lungs. This takes place again and again, each new effort depriving the lungs of some of the air which they contain, till at length the body no longer rises to the surface, water alone is received in the vain efforts to respire, and involuntary and forced expirations still continue to drive the air out of the lungs. At length all these involuntary efforts cease, the body falls to the bottom of the water, and bubbles of air are forced from the chest by the elastic reaction of its parietes. The greater part of the water which has been taken in finds its way into the stomach, and a smaller proportion into the lungs; and this portion forms the foam constantly met with in persons who have perished in this way. The quantity of water found in the stomach and lungs, in this form of death from drowning, will differ in different cases. Where the indi- vidual is in possession of all his strength at the moment of immersion, his struggles will be violent and often repeated, and a considerable quantity of water will be swallowed. Where the person is weak, or already exhausted by efforts to save himself by swimming, his death- struggles will be of short continuance, and a smaller quantity of water will have entered the stomach and lungs. A second form of death is where a person loses all consciousness at the moment of immersion. This may happen from fright, drunken- ness, a sudden impression of cold, an attack of hysteria, or of catalepsy (of which the author has known one melancholy instance). In this case the body falls to the bottom of the water, rises again to a certain height, and falls again without a struggle. To this class of cases belongs death from syncope. Again, a person may fall into the water with the head foremost, and, striking against a rock or fragment of wood, perish by concussion. In a fourth case, cold may produce apoplexy. A fifth is of a mixed character. A man falls into the water in the full possession of all his faculties; he preserves them for a time, till struck with horror at the death which threatens him, he faints, and thus perishes. Each of these modes of death—from apnoea, from syncope, from concussion of the brain, from apoplexy, and from asphyxia and syn- cope combined,—must be admitted to be possible ; but it is probable that all the other forms of death put together bear but a small pro- portion to the cases of death from apneea. The appearances presented by the body of the drowned after death will of course vary with the manner of their death. 1. In apnea, the face is in general pale, sometimes of a slight violet hue ; the hands, the feet, and other parts of the body, may also present the same discolouration. There is a frothy foam at the mouth, and the tongue is often found between the teeth. There is also a froth, sometimes, though rarely, tinged with blood, in the larynx, trachea, and bronchi. The mucous membrane of the trachea is ge- nerally colourless, but sometimes of a light rosy tint. There is a variable quantity of water in the trachea and in the first divisions of y


[134/216 b3303073x_0002_0134.jp2]

314 DEATH BY DROWNING. the bronchia, and sometimes in their most minute ramifications. In general, the quantity does not amount to more than half a table-spoon- ful, but it may fill the entire bronchial tubes. The water occasionally carries with it portions of slime or mud, or the fragments of plants. The lungs themselves have a violet hue, and contain a large quantity of black fluid blood. Their volume is often so great, that their ante- rior edges meet, and even overlap each other on the division of the mediastinum. The right cavities of the heart and the vene cavee contain a considerable quantity of blood ; while the left cavities and the aorta are comparatively empty. The stomach almost always con- tains a fluid analogous to that in which the body has been immersed, and the quantity is sometimes very considerable. The intestines have a rosy colour ; the liver and spleen are gorged with blood. Some- times the bladder contains some spoonsful of rose-coloured or sanguino- lent urine. The vessels of the brain contain a small quantity of blood, and the medullary substance presents when sliced a number of bloody points. Sand or mud is often found in the hollow of the nails. Such are the appearances in the bodies of those who die of apnea. In those who die of syncope, the appearances are different. The face and the skin of the body are pale. The trachea is empty, or con- tains but a small quantity of water, but no froth. The lungs are but slightly developed, and natural in colour. There is a small quantity of blood in the right and left cavities of the heart, in the arteries and veins. The brain and other organs are in a natural state. There is no water in the stomach, unless the individual have taken it be- fore submersion. Death by concussion and by apoplexy will show the usual appear- ances in the brain. The latter mode of death, according to Devergie, is extremely rare; he has seen it only once. In mixed cases of apncea and syncope, we shall have a blending, in varying proportions, of the characters of the two modes of death. A small quantity of froth in the larynx, and little or no water; the lungs moderately distended with blood; both cavities of the heart and the arteries and veins containing blood, but somewhat more on the right than on the left side ; the cerebral substance presenting bloody points; water in the stomach. The appearances described as belonging to this mixed state, are those which may be expected to occur in cases in which the struggles have not been violent, or of long continuance. These appearances are probably faithfully described. A knowledge of them will answer two purposes: it will enable us to understand the variety of appearances presented by the drowned, and, in doubt- ful cases, may decide the question which of a number of persons fall- ing into the water together perished first.* The first question which suggests itself in reference to a body found in the water, is this: * Devergie, De l’Asphyxie par Submersion.


[135/216 b3303073x_0002_0135.jp2]

SIGNS OF DEATH BY DROWNING. 315 Was Death caused by Drowning, or by some other Cause prior to Submersion? This question is not so easy as at first sight it might appear to be ; for the post-mortem appearances in the bodies of the drowned are not only not uniform (this may be explained in part by what has been already said on the different causes of death in drown- ing), but most of them are not peculiar to this mode of death. In order to answer this question, it will be necessary to examine the several appearances in turn, and to inquire, in respect to each of them, whether it is characteristic of death from drowning, or producible by causes acting before or after submersion. The following are the several characters which have to be examined: a. The position of the tongue between the teeth. 06. Injected state of the base of the tongue. c. The pallor, with rosy or violet discoloura- tion of certain parts of the skin. d. The injected state of the brain. é. The fulness of the right cavities of the heart, and the emptiness of the left. The fluid state of the blood. g. The existence of bloody urine in the bladder. h. Excoriations of the fingers, with sand or mud in the hollow of the nails. 7 The existence of water in the stomach. &amp;. The existence of froth, water, mud, or sand, in the tra- chea or bronchial tubes. Jd. Froth at the mouth and nostrils. a. The position of the Tongue between the Teeth—The tip of the tongue is commonly found in close contact with the incisor teeth, more rarely between the closed jaws.* The jaws are in almost evdlty in- stance firmly closed, and, according to Devergie, the tongue is often wounded.+ This position, though not peculiar to this mode of death, would go far to strengthen the other probabilities in favour of death by submersion. b. The Injected State of the Base of the Tongue-—This is not a sign of any great value. It exists in death by hanging, strangulation, and poisoning by the fumes of charcoal, and may be allowed to furnish a slight probability of death by apneea. ¢, Pallor, with Rosy or Violet Discolouration of certain parts of the Skin.—The appearance of the surface of the body varies greatly in different cases. Sometimes the whole surface is pale, at other times bloated and discoloured. It seems to be pretty well ascertained, that the chief cause of this difference in appearance is the time that the body has remained in the water. If soon removed, the surface is generally found pale; if it has remained some days in the water, livid and bloated. The colour rapidly increases in intensity with the ex- posure of the body, especially in summer. This circumstance must be borne in mind; it must also be understood, that these discolourations are not peculiar to death by drowning. d. The Injected State of the Brain.—Supposing this state of the brain to exist in the drowned, it is of little diagnostic value, for it is present in many other forms of death. As it appears, on good authority, that * Dr. Ogston in the Edinburgh Med. and Surg. Journal, vol. xlvii. p. 54, et seq. + Devergie, Méd. Légale


[136/216 b3303073x_0002_0136.jp2]

316 DEATH BY DROWNING. the brain, though frequently found injected with blood, is by no means always so, and sometimes even remarkably the reverse, this sign may be dismissed as altogether unimportant. é. The Fulness of the Right Cavities of the Heart and the Emptiness of the Left—the fulness of the venous system in general, and the absence of blood from the arteries. This state of the vascular system is not peculiar to death by drowning ; it exists equally in apnoea from other causes. It is, also, sometimes absent in death by submersion. J. The Fluid State of the Blood.—This is another sign much insisted on by some authors. It seems, as a general rule, to hold good, for Orfila has seen only one case in which the blood was coagulated. Other authors, on the contrary, have found the blood coagulated in every case, and coagula have been repeatedly seen in the bodies of animals drowned for the sake of experiment. It must not be forgotten, too, that when putrefaction sets in, coagula actually existing are soon de- stroyed. So that a fluid state of the blood cannot be at all relied upon when putrefaction exists; and when the body is fresh it is by no means a certain sign; for, allowing it to exist, it may be the consequence of other forms of sudden death. g. The existence of Bloody Urine in the Bladder.—This is mentioned by Devergie as a sign of rare occurrence. It has been observed in death by hanging, and in some cases of poisoning, and is not charac- teristic of death by drowning. Its presence would constitute a slight probability. h. Excoriations of the Fingers, with sand or mud in the hollow of the Nails.—These excoriations are much more frequently absent than pre- sent, and when they exist may be produced immediately after death, and are not, on that account, a certain sign of death by submersion. It is obvious, too, that they might be caused previous to immersion by the rubbing of the fingers against any hard and rough body, should the party be drowned by force. With regard to sand and mud in the hollows of the nails, this sign would of course be wanting where the bottom of the water does not consist of sand or mud, or where the drowning man does not struggle and grasp at the soil. If, moreover, the body has remained a long time in the water, mud or sand will be deposited in the hollow of the nails. This sign, then, is not always present, and, when present, is conclusive only where the body has not remained long in the water. t. The existence of Water in the Stomach,—Let us admit this to be a vital sign, that it presupposes deglutition, and that without deglutition it could not get into that organ. It must be evident that the mere discovery of water in the stomach is no proof, that it got there in consequence of drowning: it might have been swallowed before sub- mersion took place, and as we cannot prove that it was not so intro- duced, it will be necessary, in order to forma satisfactory opinion, to compare the water found in the stomach with that in which the party was drowned ; and mixed up as it will be with mucus or with food,


[137/216 b3303073x_0002_0137.jp2]

SIGNS OF DEATH BY DROWNING. WATER IN THE STOMACH. ay WA what chemical analysis can enable us to prove its identity? It is possible that small fragments of plants floating on the water may be swallowed, and in such a case we should have a sign of considerable value. It must be recollected that the quantity of water found in the sto- mach is very variable ; sometimes being small in quantity, while at other times there is none at all. There are cases, then, in which we are deprived of this uncertain sign. It has been assumed, that the presence of water in the stomach is a vital sign, and that it depends upon deglutition. This assumption is partly warranted by observation. Thus it is absent in animals which have been stunned ; in animals which are kept under water from the first moment of submersion, and prevented from coming to the sur- face ; it is also proportioned in quantity to the number of times that the animal is allowed to rise to the surface. Another circumstance which materially influences the quantity of water contained in the This is well shown by a comparative experiment instituted by Mr. Taylor. One cat was lowered to the depth of fifty-five feet in the Thames, another was held two feet below the surface: the stomach of the first cat contained a large quantity of water, that of the second scarcely any. A third cat was allowed to rise repeatedly to the sur- face of the water. The stomach of this cat was distended, but not so much as the one which had been lowered to the depth of fifty-five feet.” The influence of the columnar pressure of the water is, therefore, con- siderable ; and it is probable, that where the water is very deep the pressure of the fluid may overcome the resistance offered by the col- lapse of the cesophagus, even though the animal died previously to submersion. It appears, moreover, that water may enter the stomach in conse- quence of putrefaction producing a general relaxation of the tissues, and removing the obstacle which they offer in their more unyielding state. Orfila suggests, that water might be injected after death in order to raise a suspicion of drowning where life had been taken away by some other means. This is most improbable. Should such a case occur, it would offer precisely the same difficulty as arises in the case of water swallowed before immersion. By way of making this question clear, let us suppose that water is found in the stomach. The medical jurist must endeavour to ascer- tain, in the first place, whether the body being dead before immersion, water might not have entered the stomach. a. From the effects of putrefaction. b. From the fact of the body having been sunk to a great depth. c. From the water having been artificially injected after death. And secondly, in the submersion either of a living or dead body, * Elements of Medical Jurisprudence, p. 121.


[138/216 b3303073x_0002_0138.jp2]

318 DEATH BY DROWNING. whether the water had not been swallowed by the deceased before death. If the medical jurist can satisfy himself that the introduction of water has been due to none of these causes, and he can ascertain that the fluid in the stomach is of the same nature as that in which the body was found, then he may be justified in laying great stress on the appearance in question. We must now examine the negative supposition, that no water is found in the stomach. Does this prove that a person has not perished by drowning? We have already seen that water is not always present in those who have died from this cause ; and that in persons recently dead it does not gain admission unless deglutition take place, except the body is lowered to a considerable depth. If, then, the body is found in comparatively shallow water, we should expect to find no water in the stomach, where asphyxia has been rapidly induced, where death has been caused by syncope, or where the individual has been previously stunned, or has been stunned by falling into the water head foremost. In some cases, too, the tendency to swallow may be voluntarily resisted, or the body may be, in some way or other, pre- vented from rising to the surface. Again, water may have entered the stomach, and yet not be found there after death. If, for instance, the head has been allowed to hang below the rest of the body, the water will flow out from the stomach. Mr. Taylor has shown this experimentally. Two cats were drowned in nine fathoms of water: consequently under circumstances for their stomachs to become per- fectly filled. After having remained at this depth for half an hour, they were removed and suspended with the head downwards. Water drained freely from them, and on examination of the bodies three days afterwards, none was discovered in the stomach or alimentary canal.* If, moreover, the body is long exposed after its removal from the water, the fluid contained in the stomach may transude through its coats, and disappear. The absence of fluid from the stomach, therefore, is no proof that a person has not been drowned, for it may have gained access to the stomach, and may have subsequently disappeared ; or, on the other hand, it may never have entered the stomach at all. This sign, therefore, will have little or no value unless we are in a condition to discover all the circumstances in which a body may have been placed before, during, and after submersion. k. The presence of froth, water, mud, or sand, in the Air Passages.— The mucous froth in the trachea and bronchi is often so abundant as to fill the entire length of the air passages. The cause of this appear- ance has been a subject of dispute ; but the experiments of Piorry and Orfila have clearly shown that the presence of this mucus depends upon the circumstance of the body rising repeatedly to the surface for air. * Taylor, op. cit. p. 123.


[139/216 b3303073x_0002_0139.jp2]

SIGNS OF DEATH BY. DROWNING. 319 As it does not exist where the animal is kept entirely under water, cases must happen in which this appearance is not present. The absence of it, therefore, is no proof that death did not take place by drowning. This froth may also be absent from other causes ; as from the body remaining in the water a long time after death, or from its long ex- posure to the air, after its removal from the water. When, again, the head is placed in a depending position the same result happens. But is the presence of froth in the lungs proof that a person has died from submersion? Itis not. Fora mucous froth may exist in cases of death from apoplexy or epilepsy, and in the several forms of apnea. An appearance somewhat similar is present in catarrhal affections. With regard to the existence of water in the lungs, much difference of opinion has existed; but there is now no room for doubt that it is commonly present. The fact has been abundantly proved by expe- riments on animals, and by cases in the human subject in which not water only, but sand and mud have entered the air-passages. Orfila experimented with coloured liquids, and other experimenters have used oil, mercury, &amp;c. By drowning rats in chalk and water, I have myself obtained effervescence by means of acids in every in- stance and in every part of the lungs. There is no doubt, therefore, of the fact ; but it is not universal, for some authors have failed to observe it. Like the existence of water in the stomach, it is influenced by the depth of water and the access to air. Again, water may enter the lungs of those who have been thrown into the water after death. Orfila and Piorry found, that the quantity which thus gained admission to the lungs, varied according to the position of the body. When it remained upright there was a large quantity; less when horizontal. If the head were entirely depen- dent, it is probable that none would enter. It has been suggested that water may be iyected after death. This is most improbable. The absence of water from the lungs is no presumption against death by drowning. For, as in the case of the stomach, so in that of the lungs, if the head is left depending, the water flows out. Long exposure, too, will cause it to transude and be lost. 1. Froth at the Mouth and Nostrils—Where this exists it is a sign on which much dependence may be placed, but it is often absent, and, as has been already mentioned, it seems to depend either on its great abundance in the whole extent of the air passages, or on the development of the putrefactive process, the air generated forcing the froth im the larynx and trachea into the fauces. It is on this account that it is more frequently present in summer than in winter. From this examination of the several signs of death by drowning, it appears that there is no single sign on which entire reliance can be placed. When many of these happen to coincide, we have a pro- bability of more weight. It is with these signs as with symptoms


[140/216 b3303073x_0002_0140.jp2]

320 DEATH BY DROWNING. of disease ; taken separately they may be of little value, but combined they enable us to forma safe diagnosis. Some authors, and Orfila among the number, have thought, that the question, Was the death due to drowning ? admits of no decision ; but from this opinion Devergie very properly dissents. In forming an opinion it will be necessary to take many different points into consideration,—as the depth of the stream, the time of the year, the position of the body, &amp;c. It is also important to bear in mind, that the appearances charac- teristic of death by drowning are not permanent. In winter they may continue after the body has lain from fifteen to eighteen days in the water, while in summer they would disappear from the third to the sixth or eighth day of immersion. The exposure of the body to the air also causes them rapidly to disappear, and in the height of summer a few hours would suffice to dissipate them.* When putre- faction has gone to any considerable extent, all the signs of death by drowning are of course completely removed. The time that the body has remained in the water will be deter- mined approximatively by the signs laid down at page 295, et seq. But, in addition to the signs of death by drowning already dis- cussed, we may obtain some clue to the mode of death by discovering marks of violence on the body. We must, therefore, discuss the value of the indications derived from this source. Marks of Violence.—With regard to injuries discovered on the bodies of persons found in the water, three questions arise. 1. Were they inflicted before or after death ? 2. If inflicted during life, were they the result of accident or de- sign, self-inflicted, or inflicted by others? And é. If inflicted during life, are they of such a nature as to account for death before submersion ? Now the first two questions—whether the injuries were inflicted before or after death ; and whether, if inflicted during life, they were accidental or designed, self-inflicted, or inflicted by others, are ques- tions discussed under the head of wounds. The fact of the body having been immersed in water will influence the decision of these questions, only in so far as the injuries are altered in appearance by the continuance of the body in the water. The only question, then, which remains to be examined is this :— Are the Injuries of such a nature as to account for Death before Sub- mersion ? Now we may conceive of three different ways in which the body may come to exhibit marks of violence. In the first place, the body may be borne by the violence of the stream against some obstacle, or may be bruised by the struggles which the drowning man makes to save himself. 2. A man may be murdered, and, when dead, thrown into the water; and 3. A man may receive severe injury from the * Devergie, vol. ii. p. 348.


[141/216 b3303073x_0002_0141.jp2]

MARKS OF VIOLENCE. S21 hands of others or himself, and may then be thrown (or throw himself) into the water whilst still alive. On the supposition that a man has been murdered and thrown into the water quite dead, we should expect to find an absence of all those signs which have been mentioned as signs of death from drowning ; with the exception only of such as may be present under certain cir- cumstances already mentioned, such as uncommon depth of water, or advanced states of putrefaction. On the supposition again that a man found in the water has first been severely injured and then thrown in whilst still alive, we shall expect to find some at least of the signs already mentioned, and these may be sufficiently marked to enable us to come toa decision ; but this will, of course, depend on the strength still left to the drowning man, after the violence which he has suftered. This question then ultimately resolves into another, viz.— What Amount of Injury can be inflicted in the act of Drowning by the Obstacles with which the Body may come into contact ? Now, there can be no doubt that considerable injury may be in- flicted if the person falls from a considerable height upon a bank or hard substance of any sort ; fracture of the skull or limbs may be ‘readily accounted for by this cause. Again a very great amount of injury may take place in consequence of the body being carried by the violence of the stream against hard and unyielding obstacles. The medical man should, therefore, first ascertain whether the drowned man fell from a height into the water, whether the stream is rapid, and what obstacles present themselves; and if on careful examination he finds that there are no such causes as these to account for the vio- lence which the party has sustained, he may fairly trace that violence to some cause preceding the immersion ; it may have been accidental, it may have been designed. It is important to know that, besides bruises and abrasions, which may be accounted for on more than one supposition, and may have been inflicted either before or after submersion, dislocation of the extremities is a possible consequence of the mechanical obstacle pre- sented by the water to the body falling into it from a great height. Thus, Dr., Gordon Smith relates the case of a man who some years ago jumped from the parapet of London Bridge into the Thames for a wager. ‘This exploit, it appears, the man had previously performed with impunity, but in this instance he sank and was drowned. Both his arms were found dislocated, in consequence, it is thought, of his having fallen with them in the horizontal position, instead, of hold- ing them close to his sides. To what has been said on this part of the subject, it is only necessary to add, that the medical man must exercise his own acumen in discovering what amount of injury might be inflicted in known circumstances, either by the body falling into the water from a height, or by obstacles against which it may happen to be driven whilst in the water: injuries which


[142/216 b3303073x_0002_0142.jp2]

aoe DEATH BY DROWNING. could not have been so inflicted, must have been sustained before im- mersion. It must also be borne in mind that, if the body has remain- ed long in the water, the traces of injury will be magnified by putre- faction. Having convinced ourselves, after a careful examination, that death took place by drowning, another question arises— Was the.drowning the result of Accident, Suicide, or Homicide ? Now this question is exceedingly difficult to answer. For, let us suppose that there are no marks whatever of violence on the body, how are we to say whether the man fell in, or jumped in, or was pushed in? Then again suppose, that a body is found in a certain part of a stream of water, is it sure that it fell in, in the very part where it was found ? if not, of what use are the ingenious directions of authors as to the ne- cessity of observing the spot very narrowly ? Again, suppose the hands of the drowned man to be full of leaves or grass, showing that he struggled hard whilst in the water, does that prove that he was pushed in by others ? certainly not ; for, if he fell in, he would do precisely the same. Again, it has been said, that the shallowness of the stream of water in which a person is drowned renders the idea of homicide improbable. - Why should it? Ifa strong man were to hold the head of a weak or infirm one in a basin of water, he might drown him just as effectually as in a deep stream. In such a case, there must be of course great dis- proportion of strength. It is quite possible that more than one strong” man may combine against another, and destroy him in this way. It is evident, from-what has been stated, that where there is no mark of violence on the body, we have no means of determining whe- ther the drowning was the result of accident, suicide, or homicide. Nor does the discovery of external injuries throw any light upon the question, unless those injuries are of such a kind as that they could not have been inflicted by the person himself previous to immersion, or by the accidental striking of the body against an obstacle during the death struggle. There are certain injuries which could have been inflicted only by another, such as wounds on parts of the body not easily reached by the hand of the deceased himself ; and there are others, again, which may have been either homicidal or suicidal. As this part of the inquiry belongs to the subject of wounds, it will not be pursued farther in this place, The questions which arise regarding them are not affected by the fact of the body having been found in the water. There is one case which would at first sight seem conclusive as to homicide, and that is where a body is found in the water, tied hand and foot. Dr. Smith, however, relates the followig case:—In July, 1816, the body of a gauging-instrument maker, who had been missing for some days from his home, was discovered floating down the Thames. On being taken out, his wrists were found tied together and made fast to his knees, which were in like manner secured to each other. He had been in a state of mental derangement for two years. The cord


[143/216 b3303073x_0002_0143.jp2]

DEATH BY HANGING. a2 with which he had tied himself was recognised as one that had hung from the ceiling over his bed, and by which he used to raise himself up, as he had been confined to bed for some weeks. He was a good swimmer, and it was presumed he had taken the precaution to prevent himself from employing that power. The verdict in this case was, “found drowned.”* ‘Two other cases of a similar kind are on record, one by Foderé, in which the hands and fingers were tied together with a silk riband, in numerous folds ; and another in the ninth vo- lume of the Annales d’Hygiéne, in which the feet, wrists, and neck were tied. Foderé in the one case, and the medical examiners (Mare, Guichard, &amp;c.) in the other, gave their opinion in favour of suicide. In such cases as these it would be necessary to determine whether the knots or folds admitted of being made with the teeth, or by any move- ments of the hands or limbs. The cases usually quoted in illustration of this subject, serve rather to show the imperfect nature of the medical evidence in former times, than to establish any general principle, or to clear up any disputed question. Some of these cases will be found at length in the works of Beck and Mr. Alfred Taylor. DEATH BY HANGING. Cause of Death in Hanging and Strangulation, Apnea.— Experimental Proof.—Other Causes of Death.—Syncope.—Injury to the Spinal Marrow.—Symptoms and Post-mortem Appearances in Death by Flanging.— Was the Individual hanged during Life or after Death? —Marks of the Cord not always present.—Observations of M. Es- quirol— Was the Hanging Accidental, Suicidal, or Homicidal ?— Case of Accident.—Position of the Body. As the cause of death in hanging, strangulation, and suffocation is the same, it may be well to make a few preliminary observations on. these modes of death, before proceeding to examine them separately. Though, in common language, death from any of these three causes is due to suffocation, the term suffocation has in medico-legal language a meaning quite distinct from that of the other two. Whenever death is produced by any impediment to the respiration, which does not act by compressing the larynx or trachea, it is said to be due to suffocation. Thus a man is said to be suffocated if his mouth and nostrils are closed, or if the action of the muscles of respiration is prevented by mechanical pressure either on the chest or abdomen. Certain noxious gases, too, are said to destroy life by producing suffocation. The subject of suffocation then separates itself at once from those of suspension and strangulation, inasmuch as it includes all those cases of violent death in which the respiration is suspended, by causes other than pressure on * Smith, p. 276.


[144/216 b3303073x_0002_0144.jp2]

324 DEATH BY HANGING. the throat. Our attention, therefore, must be directed in the first place, to death by suspension and strangulation, in both of which pressure is exercised on the air-tube and throat. Now this pressure may be applied to any part of the throat, and not only so, but it may be applied to the same part in very different degrees and ways. ‘The most simple case, is that of strangulation pro- duced by pressure with the fingers on the trachea. Here the cause of death is obvious ; it is the same as in the majority of cases of drown- ing ; the same as in suffocation—viz. apnea, or asphyaia. Death takes place in consequence of the mechanical hindrance to the respiration. But the cause of death is not quite so clear where the entire circum- ference of the neck is subject to compression, for in this case not only is the larynx or trachea subject to pressure but the blood vessels also suffer. In some instances both the air passages and the vessels are implicated ; in others the air tubes suffer the chief compression and the vessels escape ; in others again the air tubes escape and the vessels suffer all the pressure. The cases in which the respiration and circulation are most completely impeded are when a cord is fixed round the lower part of the neck, embracing the trachea, and the large vessels at their entrance into and exit from the chest ; when the cord is applied he- tween the lower jaw and the os hyoides both functions will be less in- terfered with, as the projection of the jaw-bone and occiput will defend the commencement of the air-passages and the vessels from pressure. Where the pressure is applied immediately over the os hyoides or thyroid cartilage, the respiration will be but slightly affected, unless great violence be used ; bu} the vessels will suffer scarcely less com- pression than in the lower part of the throat. Now this difference in the position of the cord, and in the pressure which it exercises on the organs of respiration and circulation respec- tively, will tend to explain the difference in the length of time required to destroy life—that is to say, in those cases in which death is not almost instantaneous, for instantaneous death is due to a distinct cause—dislocation of the cervical vertebre. Excepting, then, these cases of sudden death, which take place in suspension where great force is employed—we must inquire whether the compression of the air-tube or of the vessels, is the immediate cause of death. Is death, in other words, produced by apnea, or by apopleay? It was formerly the general belief that death was produced by apopleay, but this opi- nion has lately given place to that which attributes it to apnea. There is no doubt whatever that pressure on the carotid arteries and jugular veins will be productive of apoplexy ; it is well known, indeed, that mere pressure made by the finger on the carotid arteries will cause sleep, and it is confidently believed that this pressure if continued would end fatally. Nothing is more common, too, than to hear of apoplexy produced in per- sons predisposed to that disease, by the pressure of a cravat,—a pres- sure which would not affect the air-passages at all. The possibility, therefore, of apoplexy being produced by pressure exercised on the


[145/216 b3303073x_0002_0145.jp2]

CAUSE OF DEATH. 325 large vessels of the head cannot be denied ; but the question returns upon us. In cases where both the air-tube and the vessels are com- pressed, to which of the two pressures shall we attribute the death ? It is not unlikely that both causes may combine to produce the fatal result, but there is every reason to regard the stoppage of the respira- tion as the essential cause; for it is clear that apnoea would be much more speedily and certainly induced by a complete or partial stoppage of the breathing, than apoplexy by the complete or partial arrest of the circulation. Before the compression of the vessels, there- fore, would have time to prove fatal, life would doubtless be etfectually destroyed by apnoea. But we may appeal to actual experiment for the decision of the question we are now considering. “ A dog was suspended by the neck with a cord, an opening having been previously made in the trachea below the place where the cord was applied, so that aircould pass into the lungs nearly as freely as in ordinary respira- tion. After hanging in this style for about three quarters of an hour, during which time the circulation and the breathing went on as usual, the animal was cut down, and it did not appear to have suffered mate- rially from the operation. The cord was then shifted from above to below the opening which had been made into the trachea; so as totally to prevent the ingress of air into the lungs, and the animal being again suspended, was in a few minutes completely dead.”* In this experiment the compression of the vessels was in all probability less than it would be in many cases of death from hanging, when the vio- lence employed, the height of the fall, and the weight of the body would tend to draw the cord close, and exercise the strongest pressure on the vessels as well as on the air-tube. “* A man of the name of Gordon, was executed at Tyburn, in April, 1733. Mr. Chovet having, by frequent experiments on dogs, dis- covered that opening the wind-pipe would prevent the fatal conse- quences of the halter, undertook to save Gordon, and accordingly made an incision in his windpipe, the effect of which was, that when Gordon stopped his mouth, nostrils, and ears, for some time, air enough came through the opening to allow of the continuance of life. When hanged, he was observed to be alive after all the rest were dead ; and when he had hung three-quarters of an hour, being carried toa house in the Tyburn road, he opened his mouth several times and groaned ; and a vein being opened he bled freely. No further attempts succeeded in eliciting any other signs of life. The want of success probably was to be attributed to the great weight of the man, by which, the compression of the vessels of the neck, must have become more effectual than in ordinary cases, and perhaps at the same time the opening into the trachea was not sufficiently free.’ It appears, then, that where the larynx or trachea as well as the * Cyclopzedia of Practical Medicine, Asphyxia. + Smith, Forensic Medicine, Appendix, p. 561.


[146/216 b3303073x_0002_0146.jp2]

326 DEATH BY HANGING. large blood-vessels suffer compression, death may be attributed to apnoea ; where the respiration is free, or but slightly affected, pressure on the vessels may cause death by apoplexy, but more slowly ; and that where respiration and circulation are both impeded, both may con- tribute to the fatal result, though the stoppage of respiration will exer- cise the most baneful influence. It has. been supposed by some that the immediate cause of the stoppage of respiration is pressure on the nerves which are subordi- nate to that function, and Sir Benjamin Brodie’s experiments are quoted in support of this view. According to Sir Benjamin Brodie, such pressure does not prove fatal until the lapse of many hours,— we do not therefore stand in need of such an explanation when we have so much more satisfactory and prompt a reason to assign. Death takes place very suddenly in certain cases of death by sus- pension. This may arise from two causes ; the one, fear producing syncope as in the case of drowning ; the other, injury to the spinal cord from luxation of the cervical vertebrae, fracture of the odontoid process, or rupture of the intervertebral substance. This latter form of death occurs only when great force is used, or when the body drops from a great height. Louis tells us of several French hangmen who saved the lives of some criminals while they killed others ; and he was informed that they were in the habit of causing laceration of the trachea, and luxation of the first cervical ver- tebra from the second, by placing the knot of the cord under the neck, and then giving a rotatory motion to the body at the moment when the ladder was taken from under the feet. Death takes place then in different ways and in different intervals of time in hanging. Where it takes place most promptly it may be referred to injury sustained by the spinal marrow, above the origin of the nerves of respiration, and more rarely to syncope from fright. Next in point of rapidity will be the death from apnea, and the least rapid that by apoplexy, using this term not in the sense of an actual rupture of the vessels, but of that distention of them which has been described by Abercromby and others as simple apoplexy. This is probably the syncopial or nervous apoplexy of the older authorities. In strangulation the cause of death is the same as in hanging; but as greater force is commonly employed, death will take place somewhat more rapidly. Having now examined the questions which are com- mon to death by hanging and strangulation it will be more convenient to give each of these subjects a separate consideration ; and first of death by hanging. We are not without information as to the symptoms which accom- pany death from this cause. Suicides who have been saved from death, and philosophers, who have instituted experiments on them- selves, have both contributed something to our knowledge of this sub- ject. Devergie tells us that, during the unhappy times of the French


[147/216 b3303073x_0002_0147.jp2]

PHENOMENA OF DEATH BY HANGING, 327 Revolution of 1793, a considerable number of persons who had volun- tarily hanged themselves were recovered, and gave an account of their sensations. It appears, that the feelings produced are not always the same, and this difference probably depends on what has been already observed concerning the various degrees in which the windpipe and blood-vessels are compressed. Foderé has collected some curious cases. Wepfer mentions an instance of a man and woman who survived hanging. The woman recollected nothing, but the man stated, that, on the application of the cord, he felt no pain, but sank as it were into a profound sleep. Morgagni also mentions, that an individual who recovered under similar circumstances, informed him, that the first sensation was flashes of light before his eyes, and that he then sunk into the same sleep. A friend of Foderé’s after having had a long discussion with him about the phenomena of asphyxia, suspended himself to his door, imagining that he could release himself when he pleased. Fortunately he was found suspended and cut down in time. Lord Bacon has given us the case of a philosopher who took a fancy to know, whether those who were hanged suffered much pain. He made the experiment upon himself by placing the cord round his neck, attaching it to a staple, and throwing himself off a low stool. He imagined that he should be able to mount on the stool again as soon as his curiosity was satisfied ; but he soon lost all sense and would have perished, if a friend had not entered the apart- ment and extricated him from his perilous situation. From these and other similar cases, we learn that the symptoms in- duced by hanging are different in different cases. Sometimes there is an immediate loss of sense and motion, in others sleep passes into death ; and there are instances in which the sensations produced are stated to be extremely pleasurable, though of very short duration ; and followed, first, by an indistinctness of vision, and then by the ap- pearance of a bluish flame, or of brilliant circles of colours, before the eyes. There is, at the same time, a singing or hissing sound in the ears. Very soon, however, the individual loses all consciousness, and death follows in a variable time afterwards. These symptoms are evidently due to compression of the vessels of the brain ; they resemble those which occur in other cases of disordered circulation, and are like those which often precede an epileptic fit. The occurrence of brilliant circles of colours before the eyes is one of the familiar symptoms of epi- lepsy. But it is only in cases of suicide that these pleasurable sensations manifest themselves. In cases of homicide where much violence is used, the countenance expresses suffering; the eyes become brilliant and prominent, and seem to be bursting from their orbits; the tongue is inmore or less protruded from the mouth, and, the jaws firmly con- tracting on each other, compress it between them ; the mouth pre- sents various contortions, the upper extremities are stiff, the fingers are


[148/216 b3303073x_0002_0148.jp2]

328 DEATH BY HANGING. closed with force, and the contraction is frequently so strong that the nails are forced into the flesh of the palm. To this convulsive state collapse and death speedily succeed. This difference in the mode of death is important, as it explains the different appearances discovered after death in those who have pe- rished by suicide and homicide respectively. The post-mortem appearances usually described are the following— lividity and swelling of the face, especially of the lips, which appear distorted. The eyelids are swollen, and of a blueish colour; the eyes, red, projecting forwards, and sometimes partially forced out of the orbits ; the tongue enlarged, livid, and compressed between the teeth, or frequently protruded. A sanguinous froth hangs about the lips and nostrils. A deep and ecchymosed impression round the neck indicates the course of the cord, and the skin is sometimes ex- coriated; laceration of the muscles and ligaments in the hyoideal region ; laceration or contusion of the larynx, or of the upper part of the trachea. There are also, in many cases, circumscribed ecchy- mosed patches, of variable extent about the upper part of the trunk, and on the extremities, with a deep livid discolouration of the hands. The fingers are generally much contracted, or firmly clenched. The urine, the feeces, and the seminal fluid are sometimes involuntarily expelled at the moment of death. The body is much longer than usual in parting with its heat. Internally we meet with the following appearances: Distention of the right side of the heart, and of the large veins, which distention, however, passes away, when the inspection is delayed several hours, as occurred in a case described by Morgagni. ‘The vessels of the brain are usually congested, but extravasation is rarely present ; there is also in- creased vascularity of the substance of the brain. This state of the vessels is common to all cases of death by apnoea. We cannot, there- fore, attribute death to apoplexy in this more than in other forms of apnea. A mucous froth, sometimes tinged with blood, is found in the trachea, the mucous membrane of the stomach is congested, which might lead to the supposition of poisoning. The lungs, accord- ing to Goodwyn, Roget, and others, are distended with air. This distention of the lungs with air, however, though it be the rule is not universal ; for the lungs have been found collapsed. The most probable explanation of this exception to the rule is, that, in some instances, death is preceded by a deep inspiration, in others by an expiration. The post-mortem appearances, then, are those which we encounter in cases of asphyxia in general, to which are added the marks of vio- lence about the neck. Two principal questions arise in regard to persons found hanged. 1. Was the individual hanged during life or after death? and, 2. Was the hanging accidental, suicidal, or homicidal ? 1 Was the Individual hanged during Life or after Death?


[149/216 b3303073x_0002_0149.jp2]

THE MARK OF THE CORD. 329 The general description already given will assist us in answering this question ; but it is necessary to examine the principal signs a little more closely. Those which are most deserving of attention are, a. The mark of the cord. 0. The state of the countenance. c¢.. The position and state of the tongue. d. The condition of the genital orgais. a. The Mark of the Cord. In the majority of cases of hanging during life, the cord leaves an oblique indented mark, which is of the colour of a recent bruise on the anterior part of the neck, and yellow- ish brown, as if from a superficial burn, towards the angle of the jaw. Sometimes the discolouration on the anterior part of the neck corres- ponds with the whole breadth of the ligature ; at others there is a deep groove, bordered by two discoloured lines. The mark will of course vary with the size of the cord and the materials of which it consists, being less distinct when a soft material, such as a handkerchief, is used, than when a hard ligature, such as a rope, 1s employed. This is the most common appearance produced by the cord applied during life ; and the older writers on Forensic Medicine knew of no other. But it is now known to be by no means of universal occurrence. De Haen and Foderé both speak of its occasional absence, but Esquirol has the merit of having first forcibly directed attention to the real value of this sign. The occasion was afforded him by an insane patient at the hospital of Salpétriére, who was seen hanging herself in one of the gardens. An attendant immediately ran up and cut the rope ; but all attempts to restore animation proved unavailing. The features were composed and natural, and the skin not discoloured or ecchy- mosed. There was a double mark on the neck, for the rope had been twisted round it twice ; the mark was a simple depression, wethout any change of colour. In three hours and a-half, no alteration had taken place. In seven hours and a-half the body was cold, and began to stiffen ; the face was a little discoloured, the legs livid, and the rope-mark of a light brownish tint. In twenty hours the features were somewhat bloated, violet-coloured, but not distorted ; and the eyes were open and brilliant. The body was examined twenty-five hours after death. At that time the rope-mark was brown, as if the cuticle had been burnt; but there was no ecchymosis in the vicinity. The cellular tissue beneath was dry and compressed, so as to form a brilliant white band a line and a half in breadth. The scalp was in- jected with black blood. The lungs and heart were quite natural, and not gorged.* Subsequent observations have shown that this case is by no means rare ; for, in eleven out of twelve bodies examined by Esquirol, in twenty-five examined by Devergie, and in fifteen observed by Dr. Klein there was no ecchymosis. On the other hand, of one hundred and one cases collected by Dr. Remer of Breslau, no less than eighty- * Ed, Med, and Surg. Journal, vol. xix. p. 487.


[150/216 b3303073x_0002_0150.jp2]

330 DEATH BY HANGING. nine presented a well-marked ecchymosis; one the shrunken and parchment-like appearance ; in two the skin was excoriated; and in nine cases it is expressly stated, that ecchymosis was absent. In about one-tenth of the cases, therefore, there was no ecchymosis. Of six cases, also, observed by Dr. Fleichman, there was no ecchymosis in two.* These results have been confirmed by almost every modern writer on this subject. In one case of hanging, in which the cord was removed soon after the body had been cut down, I observed merely a depressed circle on the fore part of the neck, and a slight ex- coriation, with a burnt appearance over the angle of the jaw. The appearances, then, produced by the cord in cases of hanging during life are not the same in all instances: in the majority, perhaps, ecchymosis is present, but in others there is either an entire absence of discolouration, or merely a condensed state of skin resembling old parchment, or slight excoriation, or an appearance like that produced by a superficial burn. The different appearances present in different cases may probably be explained by the mode in which death takes place. If from syncope there will not be sufficient blood in the vessels of the surface to occasion ecchymosis ; but where death takes place after violent and prolonged struggles, ecchymosis may be expected to be present. The conclusion to which we are led, then, is this: that the presence of ecchymosis is a proof of death by hanging, (unless it can be shown that such ecchymosis may be produced after death,) but that the ab- sence of it is not a proof of the contrary. Here, then, a new question arises ; viz., can the appearances occa- stoned by the cord in an individual suspended during life, be produced after death? This question must be answered in the affirmative. It will be shown, when speaking of the distinction between bruises in- flicted during life and after death, that ecchymosis may be produced for some time after life is extinct. The rule which applies to bruises in general will of course hold good with respect to this particular form of ecchymosis ; and accordingly Orfila}; has proved, by experiments on the dead body, that, up to eighteen hours after death, precisely the same appearances may be produced as in suspension during life ; and Devergiet has produced the parchment-like condition of the skin and subjacent cellular tissue, as well as the ecchymosed ap- pearance bounding the depression. Dr. Casper, of Berlin, succeeded up to two hours after death in producing ecchymosis resembling that occurring in hanging during life.§ It follows, then, that neither ecchymosis, nor the peculiar parchment-like condensation of the skin is a sure sign of suspension during life ; and that consequently the appearance of the neck, taken alone, is not conclusive as to the * Br. and For. Med. Rey. vol. v. p. 615. + Lecons de Méd. Lég. vol. i. p. 381. £ Vol. il. p. 394. § British and Foreign Medical Review, vol. v. p. 615.


[151/216 b3303073x_0002_0151.jp2]

STATE OF COUNTENANCE, TONGUE, GENITAL ORGANS. 331 question under consideration. A very considerable effusion of blood, a rupture of the trachea, a separation of its cartilages, a dislocation of the spine, a division of the coats of the vessels, or, indeed, any evi- dence of great violence would furnish a strong probability of suspen- sion during life, for it is highly improbable that much force would be used in suspending a body which had been previously deprived of life by other means. b. The State of the Countenance-—The mere expression of the coun- tenance varies so much in different cases, both of suicidal and homi- cidal hanging, that it cannot assist us in deciding the present ques- tion. The degree of injection of the vessels of the head and face, however, may afford us some assistance. A congested state of those vessels, though it might be present in death from natural causes, as from apoplexy, would furnish a probability in favour of suspension during life; for, suspension after death, though it might produce dis- colouration of the neck itself, could not cause turgescence of the vessels of the head and face. c. The Position and State of the Tonguwe.-—An injected state of the base of the tongue is common to all forms of death by apnoea, and occurs in hanging. The tongue is also protruded in other forms of death, beginning at the lungs. Dr. Gordon Smith supposed that this protrusion of the tongue in hanging altogether depends on the position of the cord ; but this is doubted by Devergie, and probably with reason. It is in any case a sign of little value. d. The State of the Genital Organs.—The genital organs of both sexes are affected in death by hanging. In the female, redness of the labia and discharge of blood have been noted, and in the male a more or less complete state of erection of the penis, with discharge sometimes of urine, but more generally of mucus. Dr. Guyon, of Martinique, had an opportunity of observing and inspecting after death twenty-one cri- minals, of whom fourteen were hanged, and seven beheaded. In all of those who were hanged the penis became suddenly and forcibly erect, five urinated freely, and in the remaining nine the penis was found half-erect, and the canal of the urethra filled with a liquid which was thought too large in quantity to be derived solely from the prostate. Of the five who had urinated two presented traces of emission.* Sub- sequent observation has not fully confirmed these results. In twenty out of thirty-five cases reported by Dr. Remer, nothing was found, and in the remaining fifteen, ejaculation of semen or congestion of the penis. These appearances, were also absent in Dr. Klein’s fifteen cases. But of seventy-seven cases collected by Dr. Casper, emission took place in nineteen ; and evacuation of the feces in four out of one- hundred and six. In one female out of twenty-nine, a congested state of the female organs of generation was observed. On the other hand, it must be borne in mind, that these appearances, when they do occur, * Revue Médicale, Sept., 1823. t Br. and For. Med. Rev. vol. v. p. 615.


[152/216 b3303073x_0002_0152.jp2]

S32 DEATH BY HANGING. are not characteristic of death by hanging or strangulation, for they have been observed in other forms of violent death, as in the case of a suicide who blew his brains out, reported by Dr. Klein, and a second by Remer, in which the descending aorta was ruptured by a pistol shot. It is probable that the fluid ejected from the urethra is not semen but mucus; for, in the case of a criminal executed in America, reported in the American Journal of the Medical Sciences, for May, 1840, the fluid contained no seminal animalcules. In this case, too, the emission was unaccompanied with priapism. This sign, then, is one of considerable importance, for it is strictly vital, and affords a sure proof of violent and sudden death ; and com- bined with other signs of death by hanging, it would be nearly con- clusive. On the other hand, the absence of erection and emission would be no evidence that death was not due to this cause. The post-mortem appearances are deserving of close attention, and the presence of those which are characteristic of death by apncea or apoplexy, would corroborate the evidence derived from the appearance of the neck, and of the genital organs. In cases of death by hanging, as in those of death by drowning, our opinion will have to be formed from a comparison of all the appearances present, and not from any one taken by itself. 2. Was the Hanging accidental, suicidal or homicidal ?—Accidental hanging is of rare occurrence, but it has happened. Dr. Smith, men- tions the case of a girl who was swinging in a brewhouse, and near the rope used by her for that purpose, was another for drawing up slaughtered sheep. In the course of the exercise her head got through a noose of this second rope, by which she was pulled out of the swing, and kept suspended at a considerable height, until she died.* Mr. Taylor relates a second case which was communicated to him by one of his pupils. A boy ten years old had been amusing himself by fastening a piece of plaid gown to a loop in a cord, which was sus- pended from a beam in the room. In the act of swinging he raised himself up, and gave himself a turn, when the loop of rope suddenly caught him under the chin, and suspended him until life was entirely extinct. A playmate was witness of the occurrence.} These rare cases will occasion little difficulty, as the manner of the death would be readily ascertained. The present question, then, is narrowed to this: Was the Hang- ing suicidal or homicidal? ‘The probability is always strongly in favour of suicide, as it would obviously be extremely difficult for any single man, or even for two or three together to suspend another, and it is a mode of death which a murderer is little likely to resort to. This is all that can‘be said with certainty on the subject, for there is obviously no direct means of distinguishing the suicidal from the homi- cidal act. If a man were found suspended at a height from the * Forensic Medicine, p. 236. + Elements of Medical Jurisprudence, p. 173.


[153/216 b3303073x_0002_0153.jp2]

POSITION OF THE BODY. Bay ground which he could not by any possibility have reached, and with no object near on which he could have mounted, we might reasonably conclude that he was suspended by another. It was once supposed that when a person was found with the feet or some part of the body touching the ground, he was more likely to have been hanged by another than by himself ; but careful observation has shown this to be an error, for suicides have been found in every imaginary position, and very many in such a posture that death must have been produced by strangulation, the suicide leaning forward so as to compress the windpipe. Several cases of this kind are on record. The following may be taken as an example :— In the year 1613, a number of persons, amongst whom was a man called Stewart, the juggler, were tried for witchcraft. The poor man complained to some ministers, who were sent to exhort him to repent of his league with the devil, “‘ that he was so straitly guarded, that it lay not in his power to get his hand to take off his bonnet, nor to get bread to his mouth. Andimmediately after the departing of the two ministers from him, the juggler being sent for at the desire of my Lord of Eglintoune, to be confronted with a woman of the burgh of Air, called Janet Bous, who was apprehended by the magistrates of the burgh of Air for witchcraft, and sent to the burgh of Irvine pur- posely for that affair, he was found by the burgh officers who went about him, strangled and hanged by the cruik of the door, with a tait of hemp, supposed to have been his garter, or string of his bonnet, not above the length of two span long, his knees not being from the ground half a span, and was brought out of the house, his life not being totally expelled. But, notwithstanding of whatsoever means used in the contrary for remeid of his life, he revived not, but so ended his life miserably, by the help of the devil his master.” * In another case of undoubted suicide, the body was found partly reclining on the bed, but suspended by the neck from a cord, fastened toa nail.+ A great many cases, illustrated by engravings, in which the bodies of suicides were found placed in every possible attitude, are given in an interesting paper in the Annales d’Hygiene.t As in most of the cases in which the body touches the ground the cord would not be so put on the stretch as to give it its usual oblique position, there would be no real difference between such cases and cases of strangulation, except, perhaps, that in the latter the mark would be more distinct, and extend round the greater part of the cir- cumference of the neck. The marks of violent struggles on the clothes or person of the deceased, or of severe injuries, might raise. a. suspicion of homi- cide ; but as severe and extensive injuries have. been known to be * Sir Walter Scott, Demonology and Wakchorift, p. 323. i Case of Mr. W. Elder, Times newspaper, October, 1838. Tom. v. p. 156.


[154/216 b3303073x_0002_0154.jp2]

334 DEATH BY HANGING. * Br. and For. Med. Rev., vol. v. Pp 615. produced by a suicide, or to take place accidentally, this criterion must be used with great caution. It appears, then, that in death by hanging, the presumption is al- ways strongly in favour of suicide, but that we can rarely have the means of converting this presumption into certainty, or even of add- ing materially to its force. The two following cases, however, are related by Dr. Casper. A boy was found hanging. A round ecchymosed mark, the size of a shilling was seen on the larynx, with several impressions on the sur- rounding skin ; but there was neither depression nor ecchymosis in the course of the cord. The boy had been strangled and then hanged. A man, 60 years of age, was found suspended to a hook in the door, so that the nates were only nine inches from the floor, and his legs were stretched out at full length. The cord by which he was suspended was from two to three feet long, and was loosely passed round his neck. The furniture of the room was in great disorder. Some marks of dried blood were seen on one part of the floor. The right side of the head and face was bruised and excoriated in several places. The cord had produced a circular impression without extra- vasation. A little above this was a strongly marked ecchymosis, ex- tending round about one half of the neck to the occiput, and blood was found extravasated in the skin beneath this mark. The medical opinion given was, that the deceased had been murdered previous to suspension, and this was confirmed by evidence subsequently pro- duced.* For several interesting cases, and among others that of the Duc de Bourbon, the reader is referred to Beck’s Medical Jurisprudence.} DEATH BY STRANGULATION. The Cause of Death the same as in Death by Hanging.—The marks of the Ligature more circular, and the amount of Injury greater.— Was Death caused by Strangulation, or was the constricting force ap- plied after Death?—Case of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey.— Was the Strangulation accidental, suicidal, or homicidal 2? —Cases of Ac- cident. Death by hanging differs from death by strangulation, inasmuch as the one includes the idea of suspension, which the other does not. Strangulation may be effected either by the uniform pressure of a ligature round the neck, or by direct pressure on the trachea, and in rare instances the two may be combined, some object being in- troduced into the folds of the ligature, and placed immediately over the windpipe. From this distinction between death by hanging and death by strangulation, it follows that, as a general rule, the mark on the neck + Seventh Edition, p. 634.


[155/216 b3303073x_0002_0155.jp2]

WAS THE CORD APPLIED BEFORE OR AFTER DEATH? 335 will differ in the two cases ; being oblique and high in the neck in death by hanging, circular and low down in death by strangulation. From this general rule, however, those cases of hanging must be ex- cepted in which the body is not completely suspended, but touches the ground ; and those rare cases of strangulation in which the ligature happens to be fixed somewhat obliquely. The mark in hanging, therefore, may happen to be circular, and that in stran- gulation more or less oblique. Another difference is, that in stran- gulation much more force is used than in hanging; hence the mark on the neck will be more visible, and the injury to the subjacent parts more considerable, and this will be especially the case in ho- micidal hanging, for the murderer generally uses more violence than is necessary to effect his purpose. The same questions arise in the case of strangulation, as in that of death by hanging—viz., 1. Was death caused by strangulation ; or, was the constricting force applied after death? 2. Was the strangulation accidental, suicidal, or homicidal ? 1. Was Death caused by Strangulation, or was the constricting force applied after Death?—A cord applied within a few hours of death would produce a certain degree of ecchymosis, but not that degree of it which would result from the violent application of the cord during life, and the turgescence of the countenance, as well as the post- mortem appearance on the throat itself, and in the chest, would be wanting. It is only, therefore, in the scarcely conceivable case of slight foree being used, and death taking place suddenly, as from syncope, that the appearances produced by a cord applied during life could resemble those due to its application after death. The same observations apply to direct pressure on the windpipe. As, more- over, strangulation is rarely resorted to by a suicide, the murderer is very unlikely to hide the real mode of death by applying a cord after he has despatched his victim by other means. It is much more probable that having strangled his victim, he should endeavour to conceal the real mode of death, by placing the body in a position and under circumstances suggestive of suicide. This was done by the murderers of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, an emi- nent magistrate of Middlesex, who had been active in suppressing the political disturbance of 1677. He was found lying in a ditch in the neighbourhood of Islington, with his own sword passed through his chest, and his gloves and other articles of dress so disposed as to lead to the belief that he had committed suicide. On examination there was no blood found at the wound, though the sword had passed through the heart, and on further examination an ecchymosed mark an inch broad, was found extending round the neck; the face which during life was remarkably pale, was livid and suffused, and the eyes blood- shot. The cervical vertebree were found fractured, and the neck so flexible that it could be turned from one shoulder to the other. The manner of his death, as proved by accomplices, on the trial of Green,


[156/216 b3303073x_0002_0156.jp2]

_ Berry, and Hill, for his murder, was thus: having enticed him, under a false pretence, to a remote situation about Somerset House, a man came behind him, twisted a handkerchief, and threw it about his neck, whén four of them threw him down, and strangled him. Not entirely accomplishing their purpose in this way, the person who fixed the handkerchief, twistéd his neck round, using violence to the body with his knee. This was on Saturday night. The body was con- cealed till the Wednesday night following, when about twelve o’clock it was carried away in a sedan chair, and thrown into a ditch. They then passed his own sword through him, and laid his gloves and some other things on the bank, so as to excite the belief that he had com- mitted suicide.* In another case, that of Bartholomew Pourpre, the deceased was first strangled and then suspended, and the mark of the cord being at the lower part of the neck, instead of the upper, and the teeth knocked in and bloody, strongly confirmed the other evidence ; and the mur- derer was convicted. 2. Was the Strangulation accidental, suicidal, or homicidal ? — Strangulation, like hanging, may take place accidentally. Of the possibility of such an occurrence, the following case related by Dr. Smith, is an example :— A young man of a particular turn for mechanical and other inven- tions, having lost in a great degree the use of his upper extremities, was accustomed to assist himself in moving a heavy weight by means of a cord attached to it and passed round his neck. One morning, shortly after having retired from the family to his own room, his sister discovered him sitting in a chair apparently lifeless. He was found to be quite dead, and the cord, by which he moved the weight, was twisted round the neck. On cutting the cord, the weight which was appended to it, fell on the floor. There was but little doubt from the appearance of the furniture around the body, that the deceased had at- tempted to move the weight in the usual way, but that, in this at- tempt, the weight had slipped behind and had caused a compression of the trachea sufficient to produce strangulation. The following case of accidental strangulation occurred in the month of July, 1839 :—An extremely dissipated, drunken, and disorderly woman of the name of Elizabeth Kenchan, went to bed intoxicated, and on Tuesday morning was found strangled in her bonnet strings. It appears that she went to bed with her bonnet on, and falling out of bed, her bonnet became fastened between the bedstead and the wall ; and she, being so drunk as to be unable to loosen the strings, was con- sequently strangled. These rare cases of accident would be easily known to be such by the position of the body and the circumstances of the case. It is very unlikely that accidental strangulation would occur in any * State Trials.


[157/216 b3303073x_0002_0157.jp2]

WAS THE STRANGULATION SUICIDAL OR HOMICIDAL ? 337 other way than by means of a cord or string ; but in the following | case an attempt was made to attribute the death to the accidental pressure of the fingers :— In 1763, a man named Beddingfeld was found dead in his bed- room, and the charge was laid against his wife and man-servant. The medical testimony was very unsatisfactory, as no dissection had taken place, but, it was proved that there were marks about the neck resem- bling those of fingers. A contradictory account was, however, given of the fran ; one surgeon said a thumb and ¢hree fingers ; the other, a thumb and four fing gers ; while another witness, who also saw the marks at the inquest, spoke of éo only, “which looked as if the blood was set in the skin.’”? The defence was, that the deceased had fallen out of bed, and was found lying on the floor on his face, with one hand round his neck. The discrepancies in the testimony, and the omission of dissection, might however have led to subsequent doubts, had not one of the condemned persons confessed that he had strangled Beddingfield, by seizing his throat with his left hand, while asleep, and that though the deceased struggled violently and made some noise, yet he soon accomplished his purpose. There are a few cases, then, in which death by strangulation has been due to accident ; but on the supposition that we have convinced ourselves that death did not take place in this way, the question is narrowed, and assumes this shape :— Was the Strangulation suicidal or homicidal ? — Strangulation is rarely the act of a suicide, unless we consider the cases already al- luded to under the head of death by hanging, in which the body, being partially supported, is forcibly thrown on the ligature, as cases of strangulation. _ It would be extremely difficult for a man to strangle himself by the pressure of his hands even with the assistance of a ligature ; but a case is related by Orfila, of a suicide who was found lying dead in his bed, with two cravats twisted several times round his neck. More commonly a stick, or some such object, is used as a means of producing the necessary compression. Thus, a case is recorded in the Times newspaper, Nov. 1838, of a Mr. Watson, aged 88, who strangled himself by placing the poker through the tie of his handkerchief and twisting it round and round. Dunlop relates the case of a Malay who used a small stick for the same purpose. In another instance, the handle of a pot was employed. Other examples of the same sort have been put on record. The place in which the body was found, and the circumstances of the case, would assist in determining whether such cases were suicidal or homicidal. The same means might be resorted to either by a suicide or a murderer. Strangulation by means of pressure on the trachea may be assumed as in all probability homicidal. The following is a case of this kind. A trial for murder by strangulation took place at the Chester assizes, in April, 1835. The murder was committed in the following manner : The prisoner, who was a robust man, upon some slight provocation, b


[158/216 b3303073x_0002_0158.jp2]

338 DEATH BY HANGING. seized the deceased by the cravat, and pressed him firmly by the neck against a wall, until he was dead. On examination of the body, the face was found to be livid and swollen, and the features distorted. There was also a considerable discolouration and depression on that part of the neck to which the pressure had been applied. The pri-. soner was scen to commit the crime by several witnesses. The case was clearly proved against him, but he was acquitted on the ground of insanity.* The following case is usually quoted, as an instance of murder by strangulation :— Dr. Clench, a London physician, was called out of bed by two persons on the night of the 4th of January, 1692, to visit a friend who was not well. He entered a hackney-coach with them, and drove about several streets in the city for an hour and a quarter. The two individuals then left the coach, and sent the driver on an errand. When the coachman returned, he found Dr. Clench sitting on the bottom of the coach, against the front seat, with his head on the cushion. Thinking him in liquor, he shook him, but obtained no answer. He then called the watch, and they found him stran- gled by a coal wrapped in a handkerchief, and applied directly over the windpipe. The coachman had heard no noise while driving the carriage. In comparing death by hanging, and death by strangulation, in reference to the question of suicide or homicide, we may say, that while death by hanging is most probably a suicidal act, that by stran- gulation is more likely to be homicidal. To the former rule there are few, to the latter many exceptions. DEATH BY SUFFOCATION. Different ways in which Suffocation may take place.—Stoppage of the Mouth and Nostrils.— Pressure on the Chest. — Closure of the G'lottis. Post-mortem Appearances. Under this head it is intended to comprise all cases of apnoea, not produced by direct pressure on the windpipe, with the exception of drowning, which has already been treated separately. Suffocation may take place in a great variety of ways. The mouth and nostrils may be stopped by accident or by force. A person in a state of helplessness, from whatever cause, may fall on the face and be suffocated by water or loose earth ; and new-born children by the discharges, or by being overlaid in bed. Murderers also have some- times despatched their victims by this means. Another cause of suffo- cation is, Mechanical Pressure on the Chest.—This may occur from accident as by a quantity of earth or rubbish falling upon aman. This mode * Taylor’s Elements of Medical Jurisprudence, p. 194. ft State Trials.


[159/216 b3303073x_0002_0159.jp2]

DEATH BY SUFFOCATION. 339 of death is sometimes combined with strangulation ; the murderer pressing with his whole weight upon the body, and then compressing the larynx or trachea with the hand. Sometimes suffocation is effected, as in the case of Burke and M‘Dougal, by compressing the chest and closing the mouth and nostrils at the same time. Suffocation by pressure on the chest was resorted to in barbarous times as a torture. This constituted the pene forte et dure of our ancient law, inflicted upon prisoners who stood mute out of malice, or feigned themselves mad, or challenged peremptorily more than the number of jurors allowed by law, thus refusing their legal trial. “The manner of inflicting this punishment may be best found from the books of entries, and other law books, all of which generally agree, that the prisoner shall be remanded to the place from whence he came, and put into some low dark room, and there laid on his back without any manner of covering, except for the privy parts, and that as many weights be laid upon him as he can bear, and more, and that he shall have no manner of sustenance but the worst bread and water, and _ that he shall not eat the same day on which he drinks, nor drink the same day on which he eats, and that he shall so continue till he die.” Some authorities say till he answers. A curious case of accidental suffocation from pressure on the chest which nearly proved fatal, is mentioned by Dr. Roget: “ An athletic black, of pugilistic celebrity, had been selected, from the fine form of his chest, and well-marked expression of his muscles, as an academic model. It was wished to obtain a cast of his body ; but this being attempted at one operation, and in one entire piece, as soon as the plaster began to set, he felt on a sudden deprived of the power of respiration, and, to add to his misfortune, was cut off from the means of expressing his distress. His situation, however, was fortunately perceived just in time to save his life, by breaking his bonds and re- leasing him from the extreme peril in which they had placed him.”* Persons have been pressed to death ina crowd. On the 14th of June, 1837, no less than twenty-three persons lost their lives at the Champs de Mars, in this way, death being due partly to suffocation and partly to severe injury to the chest. Another cause of suffocation is the closure of the glottis. This is sometimes intentional, and sometimes accidental, or the result of disease. Galen states, that the slaves, when brought into the pre- sence of their judges or executioners, suffocated themselves by swal- lowing their tongue; and this statement is rendered probable, by a case related by Dr. Walsh, on the authority of a friend of his, who was passing through the carioca when a slave was tied up and flogged. After a few lashes he hung his head, apparently lifeless, and when taken down he was actually dead, and his tongue found wedged in the cesophagus so as completely to close the trachea. * Cyc. Pr. Med. vol. i. p. 177. + Notices of Brazil.


[160/216 b3303073x_0002_0160.jp2]

340 DEATH BY SUFFOCATION. The following curious case, which occurred in Austria, in 1833, is quoted from Dr. Wagner: “ A criminal who had been shut up alone in a dark dungeon, when visited by his keeper not long after, was found lying dead on the floor. It was thought that he had had a fit of apoplexy, and a vein was opened, but to no purpose. It was for the first time noticed that he had a foreign body in his mouth, and it proved to be a piece of woollen cloth, two ells long, and a quarter broad ; a shawl, in fact, which the wretched man had thrust into his throat.” * This mode of suffocation by means of foreign bodies thrust into the mouth has been employed in cases of infanticide. Suffocation has been produced by objects accidentally swallowed. Anacreon is said to have died from swallowing a grape-seed ; Gilbert the poet from swallowing a piece of mutton. There is a case on record of suffocation caused by swallowing a bee in some honey ; another in which death was caused by slake lime getting into the larynx, and producing violent inflammation there. Tumours in the glottis have led to the same result. Suffocation is also apt to be pro- duced by the contents of the stomach, rejected during a fit of intoxica- tion, getting into the windpipe. Thus Paris and Fonblanque quote a case that occurred in St. James’s workhouse, and fell under the parti- cular notice of Mr. Alcock. ‘“ The patient was seized, after a hearty meal of pork, with an epileptic fit, during which he died ; when, upon opening the trachea, it was found to contain a quantity of animal matter, resembling the pork on which he had recently dined.” Suffocation has not a very extensive medico-legal application. It is not a mode of death sufficiently sure to be frequently adopted either by a murderer or a suicide. Where it is employed it will not be easy to ascertain the fact by inspection of the body, unless the appearances characteristic of asphyxia are present in a very marked form, and traces of violence are at the same time found on the corpse. Where the body is very weak from any cause, as in the new-born infant, the old man, or the intoxicated, suffocation is not very difficult to effect, and, if unaccompanied by violence, would not leave sufficient marks on the body to guide us to a decision. The post-mortem appearances present in well-marked cases of suffo- cation may be deduced from the account given by Dr. Ollivier of Angers, of the persons suffocated in the Champs de Mars. In all the twenty-three persons, without exception, the skin of the face and neck was of a uniform violet tint, spotted with blackish ecchymoses. In nine there was infiltration of blood under the conjunctiva of the eye; in four, sero-sanguineous froth running from the mouth and nose ; in four, blood flowing from the nostrils; in three, blood flowing from the ears; in seven, fractures of the ribs; in two fe- males, fracture of the sternum. In sixteen bodies that were opened, the blood was black, diffluent, and filling all the large veins at the * Dr. Cummin, Med. Gazette, vol. xiii. p. 973. ON


[161/216 b3303073x_0002_0161.jp2]

POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES. CASE OF M. CAMPBELL. 341 right side of the heart. The pulmonary tissue was mostly of a red- dish brown, and in three-quarters of each lung, posteriorly, there was a considerable accumulation of black and liquid blood ; but there was no ecchymosis, either on the surface or in the substance of the lungs, except in one case. In all the cases in which there was infil- tration of blood beneath the conjunctiva, and in those in which blood flowed from the ears, the vessels of the pia mater and substance of the brain were gorged with blood.* In consequence of the comparatively slight traces of injury left after death by suffocation, this mode of death was, previous to the passing of the Anatomy Act, selected by murderers anxious to dispose of the bodies of their victims. It was in this way that the victims of Burke and Bishop were destroyed. The following are some of the particulars of the trial of Wm. Burke and Ellen Macdougall, for the murder of Margery Campbell, which trial took place 24th December, 1828, before the Justiciary Court of Edinburgh. The deceased was last seen alive by several witnesses drinking in the house of Burke, about eleven o’clock on the evening of the murder. On the following day she was missed by some of these witnesses, and on searching the premises of Burke, her dead body was found lying concealed in some straw. Information was speedily given to the police, but when a search was made by the officers, the body of the deceased could not be found. They succeeded, however, in tracing it to a dissecting-room to which it had been, in the mean- time, conveyed in a tea-chest. From the confession of an accomplice, it subsequently appeared, that Burke had destroyed the deceased by sitting on her body, at the same time that he covered her mouth and nostrils with one hand, and applied the other forcibly under the chin. The body when examined by Dr. Christison and Mr. Newbegging, about fifty-nine hours after death, presented the following appear- ances: the face was livid ; features composed, but somewhat more turgid than natural ; the lips of a dark colour ; and the conjunctivee of the eyes blood-shot. There was a little fluid blood on the left cheek, ap- parently from the nostrils; the tongue was not protruded or torn by the teeth; the cuticle under the chin was much ruffled, and the surface of the true skin, when laid bare, was dry and brown ; but there was no ecchymosis. There was no effusion of blood or laceration of the parts around the windpipe, and no injury of the cartilages, but the os hyoides and thyroid cartilage were further apart than usual, in consequence of the stretching of the interposed ligament. The in- teguments, except on the face, were perfectly free from lividity, and the joints were flaccid. The following were the internal ap- pearances: The membrane of the windpipe healthy, with here and there some tough mucus, not frothy, and a few points of blood between it and the membrane. The organs within the chest were * Annales d’Hygiéne, vol. xviii. p. 485.


[162/216 b3303073x_0002_0162.jp2]

342 DEATH BY SUFFOCATION. perfectly natural; the lungs remarkably so, and but little distended with blood. The blood throughout the body was black and fluid, and accumulated in the large veins, and in the right cavities of the heart. There were some marks of violence on the limbs, and in the spinal canal, which were shown to have been occasioned by the forcible doubling up of the body. In this case there is no doubt that death was caused by suffocation, and yet the appearance of the body was not such as to lead at once to the conclusion, that death had happened in this way ; for Dr. Chris- tison admits that, before he was aware of the manner in which the deceased was destroyed, he was inclined to ascribe her death to the injury done to the spine. In allusion to the opinion expressed by some medical men, that the signs of suffocation are so strongly marked as of themselves to arrest attention, Dr. Christison observes, “ In the body of the woman Campbell, no person of skill, whose at- tention was pointedly excited by being told that from general circum- stances murder was probable, but the manner of death unknown, could have failed to remark signs that would raise a suspicion of suf- focation. But if his attention had not been roused ; if, for example, he had examined it in the anatomical theatre of an hospital, without knowing that suspicions from general circumstances were entertained regarding it, he might have inspected it even minutely, and yet neg- lected the appearances in question. Nay, a person of skill and ex~ perience would have been more likely to do so than another, because every one who is conversant with pathological anatomy must be familiar with such or similar appearances, as arising from various natural diseases.”’* In the case of Carlo Ferrari, the victim of Hare and Bishop, the ap- pearances from which suffocation might have been inferred were even less strongly marked. The face, it is true, was swollen, and the eyes were blood-shot ; but the lungs were quite healthy and not congested, the heart was contracted, and all its cavities quite empty. In this case, the medical witnesses attributed the death to injury to the spine, and the consequent effusion of blood on the spinal marrow, which, as in the foregoing case, was produced after death ; and they stated, that death could not have been caused by any mode of suffocation, as by drowning, hanging, or strangulation. From the confession of the murderers, however, it appears, that, having stifled the deceased, they lowered his body into a well with the head downwards, taking care to keep his mouth below the level of the water. It would appear, then, that the external and internal appearances in cases of death by suffocation, are not always of so marked a character as to arrest attention, though they may serve, more or less, to corrobo- rate the statements made as to the cause of death. * Ed, Med. and Surg. Journal, vol. xxxi. p. 243.


[163/216 b3303073x_0002_0163.jp2]

343 CHAPTER IX: WOUNDS. Meaning of the Term.—Synonymous with Mechanical Injury.—Subdi- visions of the Subject. — CHARACTERS OF CONTUSED WouUNDS, AND OF INJURIES UNACCOMPANIED BY SOLUTION OF CONTINUITY.—De- scription of a Bruise or E:cchymosis.— Correspondence of its Shape with the Cause which produced it.—The Discolouration affects the Substance of the True Skin.—The Appearance of a Bruise may be produced after Death.— Distinctions between Bruises produced before and after Death— Effusion of Blood into the deeper seated Paris. — Can it take place after Death ?—Experiments of Christison—Fractures.— CHARACTERS OF INCISED WOUNDS, AND THOSE ACCOMPANIED BY A SOLUTION oF ConTiNuUITY.—Characters of incised Wounds in- Juicted during Life and after Death—Experiments of Mr. Taylor.— Lacerated, punctured, and gun-shot Wounds.—Detection of Spots of Blood on articles of Steel, and on Linen.—QUESTIONS COMMON TO ALL FORMS OF MecuaAnicaL INsJuRyY.— Was the Wound the Cause of Death ?— Circumstances which affect the question— Was the Wound ac- cidental, suicidal, or homicidal ?—Is the Wound dangerous to Life ?— Of many Wounds which was mortal ?— When was the Wound inflicted ? —WoOUNDS AS THEY AFFECT THE SEVERAL PARTS OF THE Bopy. — Wounds of the Head. —Fractures of the Skull.—Concusston— Compression—Inflammation of the Brain —LInyuries to the Spine— Wounds of the Face—of the Throat—of the Chest—of the Lungs—of the Heart—of the Large Vessels—of the Diaphragm--of the Abdo- men—of the Liver—of the Spleen—of the Stomach and Intestines— of the Kidneys and Bladder—of the Genital Organs. Under this head it is intended to include all injuries inflicted on the body by mechanical means. These are minutely specified in a recent statute, as follows :— “2, And be it enacted, that whosoever shall administer to, or cause to be taken by, any person, any poison or other destructive thing, or shall stab, cut, or wound any person, or shall by any means whatsoever, cause to any person any bodily injury dangerous to life, with intent in any of the cases aforesaid to commit murder, shall be guilty of felony, - and being convicted thereof shall suffer death. “ 3. And be it enacted, that whosoever shall attempt to administer to any person any poison or other destructive thing, or shall shoot at


[164/216 b3303073x_0002_0164.jp2]

344 WOUNDS. any person, or shall, by drawing a trigger, or in any other manner at- tempt to discharge any kind of loaded arms at any person, or shall attempt to drown, suffocate, or strangle any person, with intent in any of the cases aforesaid to commit the crime of murder, shall, although no bodily injury shall be effected, be guilty of felony, and being convicted thereof, shall be liable, at the discretion of the court, to be transported beyond the seas for the term of his or her natural life, or for any term not less than fifteen years, or to be imprisoned for any term not ex- ceeding three years. “ 4. And be it enacted, that whosoever unlawfully and maliciously shall shoot at any person, or shall, by drawing a trigger, or in any other manner, attempt to discharge any kind of loaded arms at any person, or shall stab, cut, or wound any person, with intent in any of the cases aforesaid, to maim, disfigure, or disable such person, or to do some other grievous bodily harm to such person, or with intent to resist or prevent the lawful apprehension or detainer of any person, shall be guilty of felony, and being convicted thereof, shall be liable at the discretion of the court, to be transported beyond the seas for the term of his or her natural life, or for any term not less than fifteen years, or to be imprisoned for any term not exceeding three years.” Section 5 awards the same punishment for sending explosive sub- stances, or throwing destructive matter with intent to do bodily harm. This law seems to meet every possible mischief which the malice of man can inflict ; and hence it becomes less necessary than formerly for medico-legal purposes, to define the term wound. By using the term wound in the sense of an injury inflicted by mechanical means, injury by fire or escharotics is excluded, and these subjects are reserved for separate consideration. All injuries, therefore, which one man inflicts on another, whether by cutting or bruising instruments, by his own person, or by forcing him against an obstacle will have to be considered under this head. The law provides punishment for all such injuries by the insertion of the words “ or shall by any means whatever cause to any person any bodily injury dangerous to life.” In examining a subject of such great extent, it will be necessary to adopt some sort of arrangement, and perhaps the best is that suggested by the surgical definition of a wound. This definition makes a wound to consist in a solution of continuity. We cannot do better, therefore, than to divide wounds into such as are without solution of continuity and such as are with solution of con- tinuity. The first will include, contusions, concussions, simple fractures, dislocations, and sprains, The second comprises, incisions, punctures, and lacerations, and gun-shot wounds, which are a mixture of the last two. The two classes of injuries, whatever may be the parts which they affect, have some points common to all the forms of violence in- cluded in the class. Thus almost all injuries affecting the deeper-


[165/216 b3303073x_0002_0165.jp2]

CHARACTERS OF CONTUSED WOUNDS. 345 seated parts of the body are accompanied by external traces of the violence which produced them, whether that violence caused a solu- tion of continuity or not. Hence, in the greater number of cases we shall have traces of the injury on the surface, and on this account it will be necessary to examine minutely the subject of bruises and incisions involving the external parts of the body. Having discussed the questions connected with these two forms of injury, those which affect the several parts and organs of the body, will have to be con- sidered. Then, as there are some questions common to all forms of injury, these will be separately examined. The following arrangement will be found convenient. 1. Of the characters of contused wounds, and of injuries unaccompanied by solution of continuity. 2. Of the characters of incised wounds, and of those accompanied by a solution of continuity. 3. Of the questions common to all forms of mechanical injury. 4. Of wounds as they affect the several important organs of the economy. 1. OF THE CHARACTERS OF CONTUSED WOUNDS, AND OF INJURIES UNACCOMPANIED BY SOLUTION OF CONTINUITY. The superficial effect of a blow with a blunt instrument is, in the greater number of cases, what is termed, in common language, a bruise, and, in scientific language, ecchymosis. As most injuries inflicted by blunt instruments affect the surface in this way, it is important to ex- amine the characters of bruises. A bruise, or ecchymosis, (from éxxtw, to pour out,) is a discoloura- tion of the skin produced by extravasation of blood into the cellular membrane. The blood thus effused may be thrown out in the super- ficial or in the deep-seated parts. When thrown out in the superficial parts, and especially in the lax and yielding portions of the skin, the colour makes its appearance at once. When the effusion is deeper seated, days may elapse before any discolouration of the skin takes place, and then it is not blue, as in superficial parts, but of a violet, greenish, or yellowish hue. It is also not always immediately over the effusion of blood. The colour produced in the superficial parts is not developed to its full extent at once ; but it continues to deepen for five or six hours. After a time serum is effused, and inflammation is set up, by which the extent of the bruise is increased. This leads to changes in the colour of the bruise, which passes from deep blue through shades of green, yellow, and lemon colour, till all trace of the injury is finally removed by absorption. The change of colour commences in the cir- - cumference, and travels inwards towards the centre, which retains its deep blue colour after the other parts have completely changed their appearance. ‘The extent of the ecchymosis, and the rapidity of the changes which it undergoes will depend on a variety of circumstances, Wy IK


[166/216 b3303073x_0002_0166.jp2]

346 WOUNDS. as the force used, the size of the weapon, the age and constitution, the full or empty state of the vessels, the density or laxity of the skin. The form of the bruise will of course depend on the shape of the weapon with which it has been inflicted, and this fact admits of very useful application. The subjects of death by hanging and stran- gulation furnish familiar examples of the correspondence of bruises with the cause that has produced them. Starkie mentions a case in which the form of a bruise furnished very strong presumptive evidence against an accused party. In an attempt at murder the prosecutor, in his own defence, struck the assassin violently in the face with the key of the house-door, this being the only weapon he had near at hand. The bruise which followed the blow, corresponded precisely in shape to the wards of the key, and it was chiefly through this very singular and unexpected piece of evidence, that the assassin was afterwards identified and brought to trial.* The seat of this discolouration, as has been stated, is the cellular membrane ; it is not, however, confined to this, but involves more or less the whole substance of the cutis. This distinguishes ecchymosis from cadaveric lividity, and from all similar appearances occurring in the dead body. In severe cases of scurvy the slightest touch will pro- duce a bruise closely resembling that produced in healthy persons by greater degrees of violence. As the appearance is the same in both cases, it may be necessary to distinguish them by a careful examina- tion of the gums, of the surface of the skin generally, and of the mucous membranes. Without such an examination we might attri- bute to severe violence what was due to simple pressure. Can the Appearance of a Bruise be produced after Death ? Dr. Christison has instituted experiments by which this question may be answered in the affirmative. From these experiments it appears, that, up to two hours after death, and, in rare cases, after three hours and a quarter, appearances may be produced more or less closely resembling bruises inflicted during life. The difference, indeed, is merely in degree; for not only is blood effused into the cellular membrane, and on the surface of the cutis, after death, but even into its substance ; and the blood thus effused is found to coagulate. A striking illustration of the resemblance which bruises inflicted after death may bear to those produced during life is furnished by the following anecdote related to Mr. Taylor by Dr. Christison-+ It appears that, while he was performing his experiments to ascer- tain whether blows inflicted after death would produce similar ap- pearances to those produced during life, he selected as a subject for a series of these experiments the body of a female who had died in the infirmary. A very short time after this woman had ceased to breathe he caused to be produced upon the members and trunk several severe * Starkie’s Law of Evidence, vol. i. Tit. Circumstantial Evidence. ss tT Elements, p. 279. ———


[167/216 b3303073x_0002_0167.jp2]

CHARACTERS OF BRUISES INFLICTED AFTER DEATH. 347 contusions. The body was subsequently carried to the dead-house, and it was accidentally seen, while lying there, by some parties who had not known of the performance of these experiments. A report was circulated immediately, that the woman had been barbarously treated before death, and it was rumoured, that she died in conse- quence of the injuries which she had sustained. So strong was this prejudice, that the interment was not allowed to take place until a full inquiry had been instituted into the circumstances. Dr. Christison attended, and gave a satisfactory explanation of the facts. Means of distinguishing Bruises inflicted during Life from those inflicted “fier Death.—In certain cases this distinction is easy. If there is much swelling, the injury was, in all probability, inflicted during life. So, also, if there is wvy change of colour or sign of inflammation ; for these changes are vital ones. Coagula afford a remote presumption, but no certainty ; for coagula may be found in bruises produced soon after death, and the same observation applies to incised wounds. Fluidity of blood, on the other hand, does not prove the contusion to have been inflicted during life, for blood effused into the brain and spinal canal is often fluid. The extent of the effusion also forms a means of distinction ; for, in bruises inflicted after death, unless some large vein be ruptured, there is little or no effusion. According to Christison, the best diagnostic mark of bruises inflicted during life, and after death, is the discolouration of the cutis from the effusion of blood into its texture. This diagnostic mark will serve us in most cases, but in the case of bruises inflicted within a few minutes after death we may, from the analogy of incised wound, expect the same appearances as in those produced during life. It is necessary to understand, that blows, even though very severe, do not always produce marks of injury on the surface. This is espe- cially the case in blows on the abdomen, where the viscera are apt to be ruptured, whilst the skin entirely escapes. In order that the ap- pearance of a bruise may be produced, it is necessary that there should be comparatively hard and unyielding parts beneath the skin ; and, on the other hand, where we find severe injuries of the hard parts, such as fractures of bones, without any trace of bruises on the skin, we should be cautious how we attribute such injuries to the blows. The foregoing observations apply to bruises in the common sense of that term; but the same effusion of blood, which, on the surface of the body gives rise to the appearance of a bruise, may occur in the internal parts as the result of violence, and yet leave very slight traces on the surface. Now, it is important to ascertain whether such effusions of blood in deep-seated parts may take place after death as well as during life. Two cases already referred to under the head of suffocation will sup- ply the answer to this question. In the body of Margery Campbell, the victim of Burke, in addition to the signs of suffocation, there were marks of severe injury to the back, to which Dr. Christison was at


[168/216 b3303073x_0002_0168.jp2]

348 WOUNDS, first inclined to attribute her death. On examining the back, blood in a semi-fluid state was found under the trapezius muscle, near the inferior angle of the scapula, as also in the left lumbar region, but there was no corresponding bruise on the integuments. Blood was also found in the cervical and dorsal regions, especially inthe former. The liga- ments connecting the vertebree posteriorly were ruptured, but there was no fracture. On the sheath of the spinal cord opposite to the rupture, there was a mass of semi-fluid black blood, about the thickness of a penny-piece, and one inch in diameter ; from thisa thin layer of the same kind of blood extended along the posterior surface of the sheath, as far down as the lowest dorsal vertebree. The spinal cord was uninjured, and there was no blood under itssheath. Dr. Christison, as it has been stated, was at first inclined to attribute the death to this injury of the spine, but, by subsequent experiments on the dead body, he was en- abled to prove, that all these marks of violence might be produced as much as seventeen hours after death; for he succeeded in producing them by bending the head forcibly down upon the chest in a subject which was cold, and in which all the joints were stiff. In the body of Carlo Ferrari, a similar effusion of blood was discovered. Coagu- lated blood to the amount of five or six ounces was found extravasated among the deep-seated muscles of the neck, from the occiput to the last cervical vertebra. A large quantity of fluid blood was also found both in the upper and lower part of the spinal canal, exterior to the sheath of the cord. There was no appearance of injury either to the vertebree or their ligaments; there was no blood within the sheath, and the cord was healthy. In this case the marks of death by suffocation were still less apparent, and there appeared even more reason to attri- bute the death to the injury of the spine. The experiments of Dr. Christison render it highly probable, that in both these cases death was really due to suffocation, and that the injury to the spine was pro- duced after death, a conclusion confirmed by the confession of the cri- minals themselves. These cases suggest an important caution in ascertaining the real cause of effusions of blood into the deeper seated parts of the body. As a general rule, if we find no marks of contusion on the surface, we should hesitate to attribute the effusion to a blow ; but in the case of a soft viscus being injured, we must not expect to find corresponding external marks. The difficulty which in some cases exists in determining whether a bruise was inflicted during life or soon after death, will be greatly in- creased, if the body we are called upon to examine is in a state of putrefaction. or the effect of putrefaction is to exaggerate the ap- pearances of injury, and to produce alterations of consistence and colour, which would make it very difficult indeed to answer this question satisfactorily. In a case, however, which occurred at Paris, the effusion of blood produced by strangulation was discovered as a black mass twenty ——


[169/216 b3303073x_0002_0169.jp2]

CHARACTERS OF INCISED WOUNDS. 349 years after death. Here, however, the cord with which the murder had been effected was found round the neck, and removed all the difficulty which might otherwise have existed. In respect to fractures the same observations apply, and in nearly the same degree, as to contusions affecting the surface of the body. There is every reason to believe, that a fracture produced within a short period after death, and one produced during life, but speedily followed by death, would present very nearly the same appearances; but here, as in the case of a bruise on the skin, if the effusion of blood were very considerable, we should have strong reasons for regarding it as produced during life. A fracture produced some time before death would be readily distinguished by the inflammation set up about it. It has been stated that contusions may be, in certain cases, re- cognised long after death. The same remark applies in a still greater degree to fractures, which, from the very nature of the injury, may be detected as long as the body holds together. Thus, in the case of Clarke, who was murdered many years since by Eugene Aram, the traces of the fracture and indentation of the temporal bone, were plainly distinguished on the exhumation of the skeleton of the de- ceased, although it had been buried thirteen years. The manner in which the murder was committed was confessed by an accomplice, and the medical evidence corroborated this confession. In all such cases we must remember, that the bones may be broken in the ex- humation of the body, by the spade or mattock, and that as medical men we can only say, that a fracture exists, and point out the kind of instrument by which it was inflicted; but we cannot say whether it was inflicted before or after death, or during the process of exhu- mation. In such cases it is not the medical evidence which leads to conviction, but the correspondence of the injury with the descrip- tion or confession of the mode in which it was inflicted. 2. OF THE CHARACTERS OF INCISED WOUNDS, AND THOSE ACCOM- PANIED WITH A SOLUTION OF CONTINUITY. Under this head are comprised incised, punctured, lacerated, and gun-shot wounds. Of these, incised wounds are of most frequent oc- currence, and to them the following observations chiefly apply. The immediate and most obvious consequence of wounds with solu- tion of continuity is hemorrhage, the more remote effect inflamma- tion; it is by means of these marks that we shall be enabled to answer the question, Was the Wound inflicted during Life, or after Death?—The ascer- tained presence of copious hemorrhage will be a reason for supposing a wound to have been inflicted during life, and the entire absence of it, as in the case of Sir Edmundbury Godfrey, (p. 276,) an equally strong reason for attributing death to some other cause. There is one class of wounds, however, that forms an exception to this rule, viz.,


[170/216 b3303073x_0002_0170.jp2]

350 WOUNDS. lacerated wounds, which are often unattended with hemorrhage. In the well-known instance reported by Cheselden of a man’s arm torn off by a windmill, and in a case recently reported by Mr. Bransby Cooper,* there was little or no hemorrhage. On the other hand, a very considerable amount of hemorrhage may take place after death, if any large vein happen to be wounded. Thus, in cases of sudden death, it'is not unusual to see a large quantity of blood issuing from the vein of the arm, which had been opened during life. In a recent incised wound, inflicted during life, the edges are everted, the cellular tissue is filled with blood, and there are coagula — between the lips of the wound. After the lapse of from eighteen to twenty-four hours there are the signs of inflammation, increased redness, swelling, and effusion of coagulable lymph. In the case of incised wounds, as in that of bruises, it is important to determine whether the same appearances that exist in wounds inflicted during life may be pro- duced after death. Characters of Wounds produced after Death.— The experiments of Orfila on the dog have shown, that the appear- ances proper to such wounds inflicted during life may be produced im- mediately after death, and the following experiments of Mr. Taylor made on limbs recently removed by amputation, show to what degree the resemblance may be carried. An incised wound, about three inches in length, was made in the upper part of the calf of the leg, ten minutes after its separation from the body, by which the gastrocnemii muscles and the fascia covering the deep-seated layer of the leg were divided. At the moment that the wound was made, the skin retracted considerably, causing a pro- trusion of the adipose substance underneath: the quantity of blood which escaped was small, the cellular membrane, by its sudden protru- sion forwards, seeming mechanically to prevent its exit. The wound was examined after the lapse of twenty-four hours; the edges were red, bloody, and everted ; the skin was not in the least degree swollen, but merely somewhat flaccid ; and on separating the edges, a small quantity of fluid blood escaped, but no coagula were seen adher- ing to the muscles. At the bottom of the wound, however, and in close contact with the fascia, a quantity of coagulated blood was found, but the coagula were so loose as readily to break down under the finger. In the second experiment, an incision of similar extent was made on the outer side of the leg, penetrating through the peronei and into the flexor longus pollicis of the deep-seated layer of muscles, ten minutes after the separation of the limb from the body. In this case the skin appeared to have lost its elasticity, for the edges of the wound became but very slightly everted ; scarcely any blood escaped from it. On examining the leg twenty-four hours afterwards, the * Guy’s Hospital Reports.


[171/216 b3303073x_0002_0171.jp2]

* Taylor’s Elements of Medical Jurisprudence, p. 275, SPOTS OF BLOOD ON ARTICLES OF STEEL. Sst edges of the incision were pale and perfectly collapsed, presenting none of the characters of a wound inflicted during life. Still at the bottom of the wound, and enclosed by the divided muscular fibres, there were some coagula of blood, but fewer than in the former experiment ; and a portion of liquid blood had evidently escaped, owing to the leg hay- ing been moved. Other experiments were performed at a still later period, after the removal of the limbs, and it was found that in proportion to the length of time suffered to elapse before the production of the wound, the appearances were less distinctly marked, that is to say, the less likely were they to be confounded with similar injuries inflicted on the living body. When the incised wound was not made until two or three hours after the removal of the limb, although a small quantity of liquid blood was effused, no coagula were found. The edges of an in- cised wound made twenty-four hours after death, are yielding, inelas- tic, in close approximation, and free from any coagula of blood.* Such are the characters of incised wounds inflicted after death. Lace- rated wounds combine the characters of incised and contused wounds, being accompanied with a less amount of hemorrhage than the former, and some degree of the discolouration attending the latter. For these reasons the distinction between such wounds inflicted during life and after death is less easily made. Punctured wounds are intermediate between incised and lacerated wounds, resembling the former when inflicted with a sharp instru- ment, and being accompanied by profuse hemorrhage ; but when made with a blunt object, being more nearly allied to lacerated wounds, and productive of but little loss of blood. Sword-wounds, traversing the body, are marked by a large depressed orifice of entrance, and a small and raised orifice of exit. This difference may require to be borne in mind. Gun-shot wounds partake of the character of contused and lacerated wounds. The orifice of entrance is usually small, de- pressed, and contused ; that of exit larger, lacerated, and its edges everted. The clothes present a similar difference, the point at which the bullet enters being small, round, and cleanly cut, while that from which it passes out is larger and more irregular. These characters, too, should be carefully attended to. They will vary in distinctness with the distance and force of the shot. There is one subject connected with the present class of wounds which requires to be examined in this place, viz., the means of iden- tifying spots of blood found on the body itself, on the soil, furniture, or clothes, or on the instrument with which death has been inflicted. We are indebted to the researches of the French medical jurists, Lassaigne, Chevallier, Orfila, and Barruel, for our knowledge of this subject. 1. Of the Detection of Spots of Blood on Articles of Steel.—W hen the


[172/216 b3303073x_0002_0172.jp2]

352 WOUNDS. quantity of blood is small it forms a transparent red spot on the sur- face of the steel, but in greater quantity a deep reddish brown crust. The application of a moderate heat causes these crusts to scale off, leaving a tolerably clean surface beneath. On placing these detached spots in a tube, and submitting them to a high temperature, am- monia is given off, which may be detected by its alkaline reaction on test paper. Distilled water dissolves out the colouring matter of the spot, and leaves a white filamentous mass on the surface of the metal. The solu- tion in water has no decided reaction ; heat, nitric and sulphuric acid, and a strong solution of chlorine, throw down a white precipitate, (a weak solution of chlorine renders the solution green, but produces no precipitate,) and the infusion of galls precipitates the red colouring matter. Ferrocyanate of potash produces no effect, nor is the colour wSensibly affected by ammonia which distinguishes the colouring matter of blood from the red vegetable dyes, such as cochineal and Brazil wood. If the steel instrument has been long exposed to the air, spots of rust will be mixed with those of blood, and will be partially detach- ed by maceration in water. They can, however, be readily separated by filtration. Such being the characters of spots of blood on steel, are there any other spots which may be mistaken for them? According to Orfila there are two kinds of spots which somewhat closely resemble those of blood. These are spots produced by lemon-juice, and common rust. Spots of Lemon-juice.—In order to show that these spots may be confounded with those of blood, Orfila tells us of a man who was sus- pected of having murdered another, and in whose possession a knife apparently covered with blood was found. This was naturally con- sidered as a strong confirmation of the man’s guilt ; but on submitting the knife to examination, it was found that the spots were due to citric acid. The instrument had been used some days before for cutting a lemon, and had been put by without being wiped. The thinner spots have a reddish yellow colour, the thicker spots a reddish brown, nearly resembling those of blood. They separate, like blood-spots, on the application of a moderate heat. When heated in a tube they give off a volatile matter, which has an acid reaction—spots of blood have an alkaline reaction, The solution in distilled water is light yellow— that of blood is red ; it has an acid reaction—that of blood is neutral : with infusion of galls it yields.a black precipitate, and a blue with ferrocyanate of potash—blood yields a red precipitate with the former, and is unaffected by the latter. The oxide of iron is thrown down by alkalies. Spots of Rust.—These resemble the spots just mentioned in colour, but they differ from both in not scaling off on the application of heat. Heated in a glass tube they give off, like blood spots, a small quantity of ammonia, which has an alkaline reaction on test paper. The spot of rust is not dissolved by maceration, but merely detached, so that it &gt;


[173/216 b3303073x_0002_0173.jp2]

SPOTS OF BLOOD ON THE CLOTHES. 353 * Taylor’s Elements of Medical Jurisprudence, p. 382. may be completely separated by filtration, leaving the water quite clear, and not affected by the tests for iron. A drop of muriatic acid placed on the spot of rust dissolves it, and leaves the metal clean, and on diluting the solution with distilled water, evidence of the existence of iron may be obtained by appropriate tests. The same effect takes place when the citric acid spot is similarly treated ; but the blood- spot is not removed, nor is the resulting solution affected by the tests for iron. Spots of Blood on the Clothes.—To determine whether a red spot on linen or other stuffs consists of blood, the piece must be cut out, and macerated in distilled water. Ifthe spot is of any thickness, the albumen and colouring matter will separate and sink to the bottom of the liquid, while the fibrin adheres to the surface in the form of a white filamentary mass. If attempts have been made to remove the stain, or if it has been formed merely by contact with another stain, no fibria will be found attached to the cloth. In such cases we must rely en- tirely on the application to the solution of the tests already mentioned when speaking of stains on steel. Orfila places great confidence in the tests for blood, but Raspail objects to them, and asserts, that stains produced by madder in a weak solution of albumen give all the characteristic reactions of blood. Berzelius, however, points out a mode of distinguishing alizarine, the colouring principle of madder, from the colouring matter of blood. He states that the colour of mad- der is rendered yellow by acids, and violet by alkalies. If, then, on adding a drop of acetic acid to the spot, we find that it changes from red to yellow, this is a proof, that the spot was produced by madder, for the blood-spot is unaltered by acetic acid at a low temperature, and is rendered of a deep-brownish hue by boiling. The infusion of galls throws down the colouring matter of blood without altering it, but it precipitates an albuminous solution of alizarine of a bright yellow. Mr. Taylor states, that among the tests proposed for the detection of blood in solution, as obtained either from the allowing steel instru- ments, or stufts spotted with blood, toremain in water, there are only two which he considers of any value,—‘“‘ The ready separation of the colouring matter by water with the tint which the liquid acquires when cold, and the coagulation of the solution withthe entire destruc- tion of colour on boiling. The colouring matter of blood in solution is known from most other kinds of red colouring matter, by its re- maining unaltered on the addition of ammonia; and the presence of the albuminous part of the blood, is detected on boiling, or on the addition of a mineral acid.”* But the albumen cannot be detected in a dilute solution. The distinction between stains of blood and red dyes is very simple. On macerating both in water the former will be dissolved, whilst the latter will remain unaffected.


[174/216 b3303073x_0002_0174.jp2]

354 WOUNDS. Lron-moulds on linen have sometimes been mistaken for spots of blood. Thus, Devergie relates a case in which he, with others, was required to determine the nature of some red-coloured stains found on the shirt of a young man, whose body was taken out of the Seine, after having lain about three weeks in the river. There were many marks of violence about the person, and it was deemed important to ascertain whether the spots on his linen were owing to blood or not. It was satisfactorily determined that the marks were owing to the rusting of a steel neck-chain and a bunch of keys, which the deceased had about him.* The distinction is very simple. Water dissolves out the colouring matter of blood, but not that of iron. Muriatic acid dissolves out the iron, which may be discovered by its characteristic tests. In these examinations it may be well to compare the stain we are examining with an unstained portion of the same material, as we may thus avoid some sources of fallacy. Supposing it to be clearly made out that the stain we have been examining isa blood-stain, the question may arise—Is it man’s blood, or does it belong to some animal ? It has been proposed to make the well-known difference in the mi- croscopic character of the blood of birds, fishes, and mammalia, available for the purpose of distinction ; but as this is obviously unsafe, except in the hands of experienced persons, and even in their hands would fail, unless the spot had been quite undisturbed, it must admit of very rare application. Barruel’s proposal of distinguishing the blood of different animals by the characteristic odour given off on the addition of strong sulphuric acid, is open to still stronger objection, for it would be obviously most unsafe to lay any stress upon evidence derived from such an uncertain sense as that of smell, unless it were used as merely corroborative of other tests, showing that the substance under examination was the blood of some animal. The following case will show with what confidence this latter test has been used in France :— Three men were charged = murder, and MM. Orfilla, Barruel, and Chevallier were called upon to examine the clothes of the deceased, and a piece of blue stuff which had formed part of a female’s dress. It was important to determine whether the stains which were found on both these articles of clothing, were produced by blood, and if so, whether by the same blood. A small portion of the clothes of the deceased was macerated in water, and a coloured solution was pro- cured, which presented all the characters of a solution of blood. It coagulated, and was rendered colourless by heat ; it was rendered of a green colour, and was afterwards discoloured by chlorine ; and yielded a reddish-grey precipitate with infusion of galls. It had also the other properties of blood. To a considerable quantity of the * Devergie Méd. Légale, vol. i. p, 237.


[175/216 b3303073x_0002_0175.jp2]

WAS THE WOUND THE CAUSE OF DEATH ? 355 solution sulphuric acid was added, and the mixture was well stirred. An odour, like that of human perspiration was instantly perceived, which proved that it was human blood. The blue stuff was now macerated in water, and one half of the solution was submitted to the action of the same re-agents, with similar results, rendering it pro- bable that these stains also were due to blood. The other half of the solution was treated with strong sulphuric acid, when. the odour which escaped was recognised by one of the examiners as that of the cata- menia, while another pronounced it excrementitial. This difference was considered unimportant, as whichever opinion was correct, they felt themselves justified in considering, that the stains on the dress of the female, were not produced by the same liquid as those on the dress of the deceased.* This case illustrates the little dependence to be placed upon the sense of smell, 3. OF THE QUESTIONS COMMON TO ALL FORMS OF MECHANICAL INJURY. Having by the means pointed out in the preceding sections answered the question, Was the wound inflicted during life or after death ? and ascertained that it was a vital one, we have next to inquire, WAS THE WOUND THE CAUSE OF DEATH ? The answer to this question will not be difficult, where a man in the enjoyment of perfect health receives an injury, and dies soon after, before sufficient time has elapsed for disease to arise, or unskilful treatment on the part of the medical man to prove injurious: before, in fact, any fresh cause of illness or death has supervened to com- plicate the original question proposed. But, on the other hand, where any considerable interval elapses between the receipt of the injury and the fatal event, disease the consequence of the injury, but depending upon some peculiarity in the constitution of the sufferer, or disease entirely unconnected with the original injury, may spring up and com- plicate the question ; or, medical aid having been called in, the ques- tion may arise whether the treatment employed was such as to give the deceased the best possible chance of recovery ; or, an operation may be performed and death may follow upon the operation—and here a question may arise whether death ought to be attributed to the operation, or to the wound by which it was necessitated. A variety . of circumstances, then, may occur to complicate the original question — Was the wound the cause of death ? It has been already stated, that where death takes place soon after the infliction of the injury, the medical man will encounter but little difficulty in answering this question, whether not having seen the * Annales d’ Hygiene, Oct. 1835,


[176/216 b3303073x_0002_0176.jp2]

356 WOUNDS. deceased during life, he derives his information from a post-mortem examination, or having been called to him whilst on the point. of death, he judges of the mortality of the wound from the symptoms present. The only cases in which he can entertain any doubt, are those in which a wound of inconsiderable extent proves fatal on account of some peculiarity of constitution in the deceased, such as unusual debility, or infirmity, or in consequence of the abnormal position of the parts injured. With regard to debility or infirmity, this may be the consequence of a tender or of an advanced age, or may arise from previous disease or intemperance. Here, though the injury be but slight, provided it can be proved that it was the cause of death, the accused will be as guilty as if the deceased had been in the enjoyment of strength and vigour. The abnormal formation or situation of the part injured has a more important bearing on the question, Was the wound the cause of death ? As an instance of the abnormal formation of a part may be cited a case from Dr. Paris. A man caught a boy in the act of robbing an orchard, and struck him a blow on the head with a stick. This caused a frac- ture of the skull, and the boy subsequently died. On the trial it was clearly made out in evidence, that a mere chastisement was in- tended, for the stick was not of such a size as to have occasioned any serious injury under common circumstances ; but in this case the skull of the deceased was preternaturally thin. Of the abnormal position of parts as affecting the same question, the following is an example :— “¢ Many years since a woman was tried at the Old Bailey for the murder of her husband, by kicking him in the groin. The surgeon who examined the body of the deceased, stated that there existed an old inguinal hernia at the spot where the violence was inflicted, and that the intestine, contained within the hernial sac, was very much injured ; a circumstance which, in his opinion, satisfactorily accounted for death. He was then asked whether a similar blow, inflicted upon a healthy individual, would have given rise to fatal consequences. He answered in the negative, and the woman was immediately ac- quitted on the capital charge.” | The following are cases in which disease pre-existing in the part injured had the same influence upon the result of the injury as the abnormal situation of the part itself :— “ A gentleman in India, was tried for the murder of his servant, whom he had killed by a blow on the loins. It was proved in evi- dence, that the kidney of the deceased contained a calculus, the rugged points of which, by puncturing the blood vessels, had occa- sioned a fatal hemorrhage. The prisoner was instantly acquitted on the capital charge, the violence having proved accidentally mortal from disease.” “ In the year 1721, a Dr. Fabricius was tried at the Old Bailey —


[177/216 b3303073x_0002_0177.jp2]

WAS THE WOUND THE CAUSE OF DEATH ? 357 for the murder of his female servant, by striking her behind the ear, owing to a large abscess situated at the part becoming ruptured. The chief question on the trial was, whether the deceased had died from the effects of the violence, or of the disease under which she was labouring. It was urged in the prisoner’s defence, that he had in- flicted the blow simply with the design of opening the abscess. The jury, however, did not agree in taking this scientific view of the injury, and returned a verdict of manslaughter against him.” In cases similar to the foregoing, the person who inflicts the injury is ignorant of the existence of any cause by which that injury, though comparatively slight, may be rendered mortal. There is one case, however, in which, according to Orfila, the aggressor ought to be made amenable for the consequences of the violence, however slight, and that is, when a woman is far advanced in pregnancy ; as he could not be supposed ignorant of her state. The English law, in respect to the cases just quoted, is thus laid down by Lord Hale: “ Itis sufficient to prove that the death of the party was accelerated by the malicious act of the prisoner, although the former laboured under a mortal disease at the time of the accident.” And the same rule will obviously apply not merely to disease, but to any other cause by which comparatively trifling injuries are ren- dered fatal. In every instance the jury will have to decide on the intention of the prisoner in committing the injury. In the foregoing cases death occurred soon after the infliction of the wound, but the same general remarks will apply also to those instances in which an interval elapses before the wound proves mortal. Here, also, a slight injury may, from accidental circumstances, prove fatal, without any doubt arising as to the propriety of the treatment adopted. Those cases must now be examined in which an interval, more or less considerable, elapses between the infliction of the wound and the death of the wounded party,—an interval during which a variety of cir- cumstances may intervene to give a fatal complexion to an injury originally, and, under ordinary circumstances, insufficient, to cause death. Where this interval between the injury and the fatal result is of any considerable duration, it is always possible that neglect of treat- ment, or injudicious treatment, may aggravate the original mischief, and the question, therefore, may in all such cases arise—Was the injury the real cause of death ? Still there are some cases in which the injury is of such a kind, that this question may be safely an- swered in the affirmative,—as where a man’s spine is fractured or dislocated. In such instances, however long the interval which elapses before the fatal result, the death may be fairly attributed to the injury alone. But strange to say, in spite of this fact, that there are certain cases in which death may be traced to the injury, even where the fatal result takes place at a long interval, the law of al- most every country lays down a certain fixed period, within which


[178/216 b3303073x_0002_0178.jp2]

358 WOUNDS. death occurring shall constitute murder, and beyond which the perpe- trator of the most atrocious violence shall escape unpunished, Thus, in Prussia, though the law is not very precise, it appears, that to constitute murder the wounded party must die within nine days; in France, the term is fixed at forty days ; in New York, at six months ; and in England, it is limited by the common law to one year and one day ; in Scotland, there is at present no limitation on the subject. It will not be difficult to prove the inherent absurdity of such limita- tions. Thus a case is related by Sir Astley Cooper of a gentleman at Yarmouth, who died from the effects of an injury to the head, received about two years previously. In this case the connexion of death with the wound was clearly made out, by the continuance of the symptoms of cerebral disturbance during the long period which he survived. In a case quoted by Mr. Taylor from a foreign authority, a musket- ball remained in the lungs during twenty-five years, and was the ac- knowledged cause of death. This provision of the common law, by which the period of a man’s iguilt is limited to a year and a-day, seems to meet with the approbation of juries, who on more than one occasion have shown a disposition to abridge it. Thus “Richard Mevin was indicted for the manslaughter of a boy. It appeared, that the pri- soner and the deceased were employed at a colliery near Whitehaven. On the day on which the blow was given, they were working in the pit together ; when, on the deceased making a reply to the prisoner who had desired him to work harder, the latter threw a stick, which hit the deceased on the head with such force as to knock him down. He did not complain much of the blow at the time, but in about a week the scalp ulcerated at the part where he had been struck, and he soon afterwards died. A medical witness stated, that, in his opinion, the wound on the head was clearly the cause of the deceased’s death. His lordship charged the jury, who in a few minutes returned a ver- dict of not guilty. Mr. Justice Alderson expressed surprise at the ver- dict, and inquired of the jury, if they could doubt that the boy had died of the wound inflicted by the prisoner. The foreman of the jury said, that they acquitted the prisoner on account of the time that had elapsed after the blow before the boy’s death. The judge observed, that a mitigating circumstance of that kind should not weigh with the jury. It would be advisable for them always to find the simple fact, and leave other considerations in mitigation of punishment to the Bench. In the present instance, had the prisoner been found guilty, the punishment would have been light ; and certainly juries should take care that their verdicts did not hold out encouragement to people to strike blows in fits of passion!* This rebuke was certainly well merited. * Taylor’s Elements, p. 304. en


[179/216 b3303073x_0002_0179.jp2]

WAS THE WOUND THE CAUSE OF DEATH P 359 Another circumstance deserving of notice in reference to this ques- tion is the existence of some constitutional peculiarity, in consequence of which a trifling wound proves fatal after a lapse of time, either from the wound itself taking on an unhealthy character, or from the supervention of some disease not necessarily or usually resulting from it. The following are some examples of this sort:— _ “ Wm. M‘Ewan was tried at Perth, September, 1830, for the ho- micide of a boy, whose shoulder he had dislocated by a blow ; which injury had led to a fatal result. But the boy being of a weakly and scrofulous constitution, and his arm having been subjected to the ope- rations of an ignorant bone-setter, inflammation and white-swelling ensued, which caused his death.” The panel was acquitted by the di- rection of the court. “ Christian Paterson, who quarrelled with another inmate of a house of ill-fame, was tried at Edinburgh, December 1823, for the murder of the latter, by haying struck her on the head with a pair of tongs, and caused a wound, which though not very severe, was fol- lowed by erysipelas, which proved fatal.” The charge was restricted to one of culpable homicide. The previous existence of injury or disease is another circumstance which affects the question—Was the wound the cause of death ? “ Two coal-drivers quarrelled. One of them (M‘Donald) gave the other a blow on the left breast. This did not make him fall, but he stepped back a little, and then fell forwards on his face, exclaiming, ‘see how he has struck me!’ He then gave a few groans and ex- pired. LExtravasated blood was found in the ventricles of the brain.” “¢ J. Donaldson tripped up the heels of David Stobo at Glasgow, April 1835, by which Stobo fell forward upon the street. He rose up, but again fell, and very soon died. On inspection Dr. Cockindale found a slight contusion on the forehead above the right eyebrow. The contents of the head and belly were in their natural healthy state. The lungs adhered to the sides of the chest, and the pericardium ad- hered to the heart. The aorta was dilated near its origin, into a large aneurismal sac, which, by having recently burst, had discharged a great quantity of blood into the chest and proved fatal.” Such cases as these can occasion no serious difficulty ; but cases of a much more intricate character occasionally occur, which require for their decision much practical and theoretical knowledge, and presup- pose an extensive acquaintance with pathology. The following is such a case :— “ Dayid Kennaway was tried for parricide in the High Court of Justiciary in December 1825. One Sunday evening, Kennaway’s sister left him at home in a state of furious imtoxication, quarrelling and struggling with his father, an old man of seventy. On leaving the house she went down stairs to a neighbour’s, where she heard the noise of the two scuffling above, and soon afterwards the prisoner


[180/216 b3303073x_0002_0180.jp2]

360 WOUNDS. followed her down stairs, and went away. She immediately returned to the room where her father was, and there, about seven minutes after she had seen him sitting in a corner reading his Bible, and ap- parently in good health, she found him stretched dead on the floor, with a slight wound on the nose, and a severer one on the forehead. When the body was opened, there was found half a pint of red se- rosity in the ventricles of the brain, but no fracture of the skull, no extravasation of blood beneath it, no laceration of the brain. There was also discovered a considerable effusion of reddish serum in each pleural sac, but no other morbid appearances in the chest or else- where. The quantity of this effusion was not accurately ascertained. We have in this case an effusion of half a pint of bloody serum in the ventricles of the brain, and this is the only sufficient cause of death. Now the first question which we should have to determine is this, Was the effusion a vital one, or was it one of those pseudo-morbid appear- ances which occur after death, and are apt to simulate the results of disease? We may safely attribute the effusion to a vital change — it being, as far as we know, impossible that so large a quantity of serum should be poured out from the vessels after death. Assuming then, that the effusion took place during life,the question arises, Was it the result of the injury which the deceased had sustained in the struggle with his son, or did it exist previously, without producing any symp- toms of disordered health ? In the first place, there was no trace of any injury, however slight, on the scalp, skull, membranes, or on the brain itself, unless we admit the effusion itself to be a mark of such in- jury ; and if the brain had sustained any violent shock, the effusion would not have been an effusion of serum, but of blood. It is contrary to all experience, that an injury proving so speedily fatal, should give rise to so considerable an effusion of what must be regarded as a sort of secretion or separation from the blood. The existence, moreover, of the same sort of bloody serum in the cavities of the pleura, would seem to negative the supposition of such effusion in the brain being the re- sult of violence. All reasoning then goes to show, that this serum was effused previously to the injury, and the only difficulty which we en- counter, is that of the existence of this effusion unproductive of any symptom of disease. If, however, it can be made out that, in cases where no violence has been suffered, such effusion has nevertheless existed without producing any single symptom during life, then we have proved the possibility of the effusion in this particular case being altogether unconnected with the violence offered. A similar process of reasoning to that which is here employed led Mr. Watson to the conclusion, that the effusion in this case was un- connected with the injury, and formed a sort of latent hydrocephalus. In confirmation of this view he quotes the following cases :— “ A young woman, who had complained for four days of some headache and occasional vomiting, but was able to go.about, was sud- denly seized with rattling in the throat, and died unexpectedly, and


[181/216 b3303073x_0002_0181.jp2]

WAS THE WOUND THE CAUSE OF DEATH ? 361 in full possession of her senses. The case having become the subject of a medico-legal examination, the body was examined, and there was found in the ventricles of the brain three ounces of serosity, and a watery vesicle.” This case is from Pyl. Another similar case is quoted from Mor- gagni. It was one of fatal pneumonia, where no less than eight ounces of serosity were found in the ventricles of the brain after death, without any corresponding symptoms during life, a case, there- fore, of true latent hydrocephalus. In the case of Kennaway, the surgeons who examined the body attempted to get rid of the difficulties by ascribing the effusion to the blows, and death to the effusion. But this opinion is manifestly at variance with sound pathology. Kennaway was convicted of culpable homicide, and transported for life.* This and similar cases shew the difficulty and intricacy of the ques- tions which we have to solve, and the utility of the science which draws from scattered and unconnected sources the materials for the solution. Having now illustrated the effect of previously existing injury or disease, in modifying the state of wounds, and alluded to the super- vention of diseases strictly connected with the wound inflicted, but arising in consequence of some peculiarity of constitution; the next point requiring notice as affecting the question, Was the wound the cause of death? is the supervention of mortal diseases arising inde- pendently of the wound. The following is an example of this sort :— Janet M‘Laren (a deaf and dumb girl) received from another woman an injury upon the head, in July, 1823. For this she was admitted into the infirmary of Glasgow. It was found that the scalp was wounded, and the skull fractured and depressed ; but there was no symptom of cerebral affection. Inflammatory fever supervened, and several weeks after the injury of the head, violent inflammation of the chest came on, which proved fatal in two days. In the chest there were found three pounds of serous effusion mixed with flakes of lymph. The right lung adhered to the walls of the chest, and formed an abscess. There was also purulent matter in the substance of the lung. In this case the medical inspectors were of opinion, that the diseased states of the head and chest, were each sufficient to have caused death separately; but that the immediate cause of death was the transference of the inflammation of the head to the chest. The next circumstance or circumstances bearing on the question Was the wound the cause of death? is the improper management of the wounded party. Now this improper management may consist in the neglect of assist- ance, medical or otherwise, (which neglect may be intentional, acci- dental, or inevitable,) in irregularities and misgovernment on the part * Watson’s Medico-Legal Treatise on Homicide, p. 218. 2B


[182/216 b3303073x_0002_0182.jp2]

362 , WOUNDS. of the jeter himself, or in mala praxis on the’part of the medical attendant. ‘There are a good many somewhat intricate questions mixed up in this inquiry, which cannot be better stated than in the language of Baron Hume. “ Tf an assault is made with a knife, or other cutting weapon, whereby some artery or large blood-vessel is divided, and the per- son bleeds to death upon the spot; it is no answer to the charge of homicide, that. of itself this wound was not necessarily mortal, . and that, with the immediate assistance of a surgeon, if one could have been procured, the effusions of blood might have been stopped and the man’s life preserved. Or, put the case, that a surgeon is procured, who staunches the blood for a time, but after he is gone the wound breaks out afresh, and the man dies before assistance can again be had ; this incident is also at the hazard of the panel. Or, what if a person receive a gun-shot wound at some remote place in the country, where no surgeon skilled in the treatment of such wounds is’ to be had, and of this wound he dies, notwithstanding the best care of the practitioners in that quarter such as they are ? Or, let us imagine that a person has been robbed, and unmercifully beaten in the night, in hard weather and in a solitary place, so that lying exposed to the cold till day, he dies upon the spot, or of the consequences shortly after. In all these and the like cases, there is an -undoubted homicide. It#is still true, that, of this very injury done him by the panel, the man dies. It has its natural course and issue, in the circumstances of the situation, such as they happened to be where the assailant did the deed, and which the sufferer has done nothing to aggravate, and everything in his power torelieve. _ If those circumstances have been unfavourable, this he must answer and run the risk of, whose wilful deed then and there done has made them of moment to the loss or preservation of the life of a fellow-creature. Besides, the uncertainty must be considered which attends all cases of outrageous injury, whether by any course of treatment the life of the sufferer could havé been saved. ‘That he was actually killed by this violence is proved, and that he would have survived in more favourable. circumstances is matter of conjecture ; only a probability at the best.” Here the absence of assistance is necessary ; but if it is intentional, or if a man calls to his aid an ignorant quack, when he might have pro- cured the attendance of a regular practitioner, and death takes place, the accused party cannot be held responsible for all the injury done, and he will have the benefit of what has occurred in the mitigation of his punishment. Irregularities or misgovernment on the part of the patient would likewise form a reasonable and valid plea in mi- tigation of the crime, and of its attendant punishment. This fault on the part of the patient may arise from several causes ; from negligence and delay in putting into operation the prescription of his medical attendant, from his refusal to use the proper means


[183/216 b3303073x_0002_0183.jp2]

WAS THE WOUND ACCIDENTAL, SUICIDAL, OR HOMICIDAL ? 363 for his recovery; or, from his exposing himself improperly to cold, fatigue, or fresh injury, or to such causes as may induce inflam- mation and fever. Amongst these by far the most frequent is indul- gence in spirituous liquors. Dr. Christison relates the following case :— “ A prostitute of the name of Macdonald, in a state of drunken wantonness and fury, struck a brothel-keeper with a smoothing-iron, and inflicted a denuding wound of the skull. The wound never healed ; the woman constantly complained of headache ; -and eight weeks after the accident she was attacked with erysipelas of the head arid-. face, which ended fatally in ten days.. The usual effects of erysipelas were found on the body ; and the seat of the wound was occupied by an indolent ulcer, from the bottom of which a small hole proceeded inwards and perforated the bone. But this woman, after meeting with the injury, kept up an old custom of getting often intoxicated ; and, on one occasion, a few days before the erysipelas began, she actually danced with great spirit, and got dead drunk at a ball. Here, even supposing the erysipelas had begun around the wound, which was not proved, the woman nevertheless led, in every parti- cular, the kind of life which was calculated to induce serious conse- quences. The medical witnesses, therefore, declared that the death of the deceased could not with any certainty be ascribed to the wound. The prosecutor, therefore, departed from the charge of mur- der ; and the prisoner was convicted of the assault.” - As an illustration of the effect of mala praxis on the part of the. medical attendant, the reader is referred to the case of Houston, re- ported at length by Mr. Watson. A boy, three years of age, received a severe, injury to the head, from a large stone recklessly thrown into a crowd: There was fracture with depression of the right parietal bone, but contrary to the opinion of the most eminent surgeons, who recommend the removal of the depressed portion of bone, the injury was allowed to take its own course. The prisoner was acquitted. fe Enough has now been said on the subject of the various circum- ‘stances which may modify the severity of wounds, augment their - danger, or tend to raise a doubt whether the wound was, or was not, the ‘actual and sufficient cause of death. On this part of the subject of wounds no general sules can be laid down for the guidance of the medical man. The circumstance of pleas in mitigation being generally urged by the counsel for the defence, should make the medical man very cautious to show no neglect of any sort in the treatment of external injuries, and prepare him to refute accu- sations often unjustly brought against the treatment he hag adopted. The next question which would offer itself for decision, is the follow- ing :— Was the Wound the result of Accident, of Suicide, or of Homicide ? * Medico-legal Treatise on Homicide, p. 233.


[184/216 b3303073x_0002_0184.jp2]

864 WOUNDS. The question of accident does not play a very important part in this inquiry. In quarrels, injuries are often inflicted, and it is essential to know whether they have been the immediate consequence of the blows received, or the result of falling against some hard obstacle capable of producing them. Here an examination of the soil or spot on which the party falls will decide the question. There is always a probability of accident when a body is found in a dangerous situa- tion, as at the foot of a precipice, or in a river with steep banks ; and the probability is, of course, greatly strengthened if the person has been drinking previously. It is unnecessary to enlarge upon this part of the subject, as the con- siderations connected with it are very obvious. If we exclude the alternative of accident, the original inquiry is narrowed to this, Was the injury suicidal or homicidal 2 The probability is always in favour of suicide ; for it appears that in France cases of suicide are to those of murder as about five to two, and it is probable that in this country the proportion is not very different. This probability is somewhat strengthened if the deceased be middle- aged, for suicide is comparatively rare in children and old people. Such considerations as these, however, will be of little use in indivi- dual cases ; we must, therefore, search for more precise means of deter- mining the question. The following are some of the principal elements in the decision of it :—a. The situation of the body. 6. The situation of the wound. c. The nature of the wound. d. The extent of the wound. e. The direction of the wound. The number of wounds. a. Situation of the Body.—TIf a person is found dead from a wound, in a room with the windows and door fastened on the inside, the cir- cumstances are conclusive as to suicide. If, on the other hand, another party could have had access to the room, the absence of the instrument of death would be conclusive as to murder. So also, if the blood from a mortal wound has been washed from the body or floor, or the body itself has been placed in a position inconsistent with the mode of death, or been buried, there could be no doubt as to the party having perished by the hand of another. In the case of a body found in the water, in a situation precluding the idea of accident, there is always a strong presumption of suicide. So also, in cases of death by falls, if accident be unlikely, suicide is the more probable. b. The Situation of the Wound.—Suicidal wounds are generally situ- ated on the anterior and lateral parts of the body ; incised wounds on the throat ; gun-shot wounds on the head and face ; punctured wounds on the chest or belly. It may be laid down as a general rule, that if the wound is in such a situation as that the instrument of death when placed in the hand of the deceased, cannot be made to reach it, whe- ther by the motion of the hand itself, or by that of the part injured, or by both jointly, the probability in favour of homicide amounts to certainty. It must be borne in mind, however, that a murderer will often make choice of a mode of death which shall most nearly resemble


[185/216 b3303073x_0002_0185.jp2]

WAS THE WOUND ACCIDENTAL, SUICIDAL, OR HOMICIDAL ? 365 suicide. Wounds inflicted on concealed parts of the person, as within the labia, and beneath the breast of the female, are in all probability homicidal. ec. The Nature of the Wound.—Contused wounds are rarely inflicted by suicides, who generally prefer incised or punctured wounds ; severe contusions, therefore, are most probably homicidal, unless the body is lying near a height from which it might have fallen accidentally, or from which the deceased might have thrown himself. Occasionally suicides have attempted self-destruction by knocking their heads against the wall, and have in this way, inflicted on themselves considerable injury. Thus, a German author relates a case in which a man first attempted self-destruction by knocking his head against a wall, and. subsequently accomplished his purpose, by striking himself repeatedly on the forehead with a cleaver. He was seen to commit the act. The cleanness and evenness of an incised wound have been mention- ed as characters of importance in reference to the question of suicide or homicide. It is generally asserted, that a self-inflicted wound 1s likely to be jagged and uneven, and that such a wound, therefore, would furnish a strong probability of suicide. This supposition, how- ever, is ill-founded, for it is much less likely that a man who has once made up his mind to commit suicide should waver in his resolution, than that a man should struggle under the hands of a murderer. The reverse of the general statement, therefore, is probably correct. It is not, however, a point of much importance. A probability is also afforded by the number of wounds. Thus, asa general rule, the suicide makes but one wound, the murderer several ; but there are many ex- ceptions to both these rules. A very remarkable one is related by Mr. Watson, in which a suicide had inflicted no less than ten wounds on his throat.* Death by stabbing is commonly homicidal, rarely suicidal. As a general rule, again, suicides employ but one instrument of death, murderers more than one. All these rules, however, are very general, and admit of many exceptions. The shape of the wound sometimes gives us still more precise information, enabling us not merely to determine the question of sui- cide or homicide, but to point out the kind of instrument with which the wound was inflicted, and the occupation of the murderer. Thus, in the case of a man found lying with his throat cut, the fact of its having been cut from within to without, as butchers slaughter sheep, pointed out the occupation of the murderer. He had been a butcher. In another case mentioned by Orfila,¢ a body was found divided into two parts by means of a cutting instrument passed into the fibro-carti- lage uniting the third and fourth lumbar vertebre. The articulating processes of the vertebree had been cut transversely through, as butch- ers are accustomed to cut through the spines of animals. M. Ouv- * Watson on Homicide, Case 72. + Traité des Exhumations.


[186/216 b3303073x_0002_0186.jp2]

366 WOUNDS. rard was led to suspect, that the man who had committed the murder was a butcher ; and this turned out to be the case, d. The Extent of the Wound.—It has been thought, that a suicide cannot inflict a very extensive wound upon himself, inasmuch as his courage or strength is presumed to fail before he has completed it. Experience, however, is opposed to this view, and it is but reasonable to expect that the suicide committing the fatal act in a fit of despera- tion, will put forth at once all the strength necessary to the completion of his purpose. In the case of Sellis, for instance, in which the proof of suicide was almost as strong as it could have been, the wound in the throat was deep and extensive ; and in newspaper accounts of cases of suicide nothing is more common than to read of the head being nearly severed from the body. e. The Direction of the Wound.—Suicidal wounds generally pass from left to right, and from above to below, such being the most natu- ral movement of the arm. In the case of left-handed persons, the direction would be from right to left ; there are many exceptions, how- ever, to this rule, for suicidal wounds of the throat are often transverse. When persons of different statures fight together, it is natural to sup- pose, that a wound inflicted by the taller man would pass from above downwards, and the reverse if given by the shorter. But this will only be the case if the wound is inflicted whilst both combatants are in the erect posture. In wounds inflicted by a sword, or by fire-arms, it is important to notice both the direction of the wound, and the ori- fices of entrance and exit. f. The Number of Wounds.—Does the co-existence of several wounds furnish a probability in favour either of suicide or homicide? If several mortal wounds are found on the same person it is improbable that they have been self-inflicted, but not impossible, for even after wounds necessarily mortal, there may be strength and determination enough left to inflict one or more others. The following, related by Orfila, is a case in point :— A gentleman of Rouen was found dead in his chamber. Two pistols were lying in the room, one near the body, and the other on the bed, at some distance from it. An investigation was made on the spot, and it was then discovered, that the deceased had shot himself in two places. One wound, which had apparently been inflicted while he was lying on the bed, had completely traversed the left side of the chest, breaking a rib before and behind, perforating the lung through its middle portion, and passing near to the roots of the pulmonary veins. &lt;A very large quantity of blood had become extravasated in the thorax. In spite of the existence of so serious an injury, it ap- peared, that the deceased must have risen from his bed, walked to a closet to procure another pistol, with which he produced a second wound that must have proved instantly mortal. The ball had entered at the frontal bone, and, after traversing the left hemisphere of the -


[187/216 b3303073x_0002_0187.jp2]

IS THE WOUND DANGEROUS TO LIFE ? 367 brain, had become lodged against the os occipitis. There was not the least doubt of this having been an act of deliberate suicide. This case, then, shows the possibility of two wounds of an ex- tremely severe and mortal character being inflicted on himself by a suicide. Such are some of the points to be attended to in relation to the question of suicide or homicide. It is evident that there is here much room for caution, as most of the probabilities just established are liable to lead to error if too implicitly relied upon. In this place also, it is necessary to caution the medical man against assuming that an injury, actually inflicted by another, is the real cause of death. Thus in an instance related by Wildberg, a girl died while her father was chas- tising her for theft, but on examination she was found to have taken poison. The circumstantial evidence in the case of wounds is of the first importance, and has been already alluded to under the head of persons found dead. Thus Sellis, a servant of the Duke of Cumberland, now King of Hanover, was found lying dead in his bed-room with his throat cut, while his master was severely wounded in the head and hand. His Royal Highness stated, that he was roused from sleep by a blow on the head, followed by several others, one of which caused an immense effusion of blood. He leaped out of bed, and fol- lowed his assailant, who repeatedly struck at him, and would doubt- less have murdered him, but that the doors protected his person from some of the blows. Every part of this statement was confirmed by the circumstantial evidence. The coloured drapery at the head of his Royal Highness’ bed was sprinkled with blood; there were traces of blood on the passages and staircase, and on the doors of all the state apartments; and Sellis’s coat was found hanging on a chair out of reach of blood from his bed, but the sleeve was sprinkled from the shoulder to the wrist “ with blood, quite dry, and evidently from a wounded artery.”™ In the case of Courvoisier, tried for the murder of Lord William Russell, the fact that the instrument of death did not lie near the body, and that a napkin was placed over the face, were in themselves conclusive as to the question of suicide or homicide; and left no doubt whatever that Lord William Russell had been barbarously murdered. Again, it was proved that a woman of the name of Norkott, who was found dead in her bed with her throat cut, had been murdered, by the fact that, on the left hand of the deceased, there was a bloody mark of a left hand. Besides the questions already examined, viz., Was the wound in- flicted during life or after death? Was it the cause of death ? and, was it accidental, suicidal, or homicidal? there are others of com- * Evidence of Sir E. Home.


[188/216 b3303073x_0002_0188.jp2]

268 WOUNDS. paratively slight importance, and readily answered by the aid of an ordinary amount of medical knowledge. These will be briefly noticed. : Is the Wound dangerous to Life ?—This question must be answered in every instance without any assistance from mere medico-legal in- quiries. Formerly much time was wasted in laying down rules for determining the mortality of wounds, or the degree of danger which they entailed. The question is much too simple to require all the learning that has been bestowed upon it, or if at any time difficult, it is scarcely to be simplified by an appeal to learned authorities. In the first place, in the case of injury to parts obviously important to life, such as the large blood vessels or the heart, but little diffi- culty can arise. Severe injury of these parts must almost of necessity be mortal. Again, very slight injuries, to parts altogether unimport- ant, may, in peculiar states of constitution, prove fatal, and, on the other hand, injuries of the most severe and extensive nature may, in rare instances, be sustained without injury to life. Such, for example, was the case of Mr. Tipper, who was pinned against a stable-door by the shaft of a gig traversing his chest. It will be useless, therefore, to dwell upon the divisions and classifications, which have been so laboriously made into wounds which are necessarily mortal, wounds which are accidentally mortal, and wounds which are ot mortal. Of many Wounds which was mortal ?—This question may become important in a medico-legal point of view. Thus, if several wounds have been inflicted upon a deceased party, of which some were punc- tured and others contused, and the indictment laid, that death had ensued from the punctured wounds only, it would become of the highest importance to counsel, in defending the prisoner, to draw from the medical witness a clear statement of the kind of wound which proved mortal. In May 1835, a trial took place in the Central Criminal Court, in which a question of this kind was raised. A soldier was in- dicted for the wilful murder of a woman at Woolwich. From the depositions of several of the witnesses it appeared, that the prisoner struck the deceased violently on the head with his fist. She fell stunned by the blows, and did not speak afterwards. The prisoner then drew his bayonet, and stabbed the deceased several times; the surgeon who examined the body deposed, that there were five wounds, two of which were flesh wounds above Two of these wounds were, in his opinion, decidedly mortal, one penetrating the lungs and the other the liver. The jury, before deciding on their verdict, requested the opinion of the judge whether, if the deceased had died in consequence of the first blows with the fist, the law would apply differently to the case. Mr. Justice Park, who tried the case, observed, “ that it would, if it were not so laid in the indictment. The murder is alleged to have been committed by a —


[189/216 b3303073x_0002_0189.jp2]

WOUNDS OF THE HEAD. 369 deadly weapon, but the jury must take the whole case. There were mortal wounds inflicted by the bayonet, and there is no evidence that the deceased died from, the blows of the fist, but only that she was stunned.” The prisoner was convicted; but if the surgeon could have sworn that the blows had been decidedly mortal, the case would pro- bably have had a very different termination. When was the Wound inflicted?—This question. may arise either during life or after death. During life the question may be decided by noticing, in the case of contused wounds, the extent of the ecchymosis and the colours which it assumes ; in the cases of incised and punctured wounds, by the state of the divided parts, whether they are filled with extravasated blood or not, and, if containing blood, whether that blood is coagulated or not; whether the edges are at all enlarged, and the surrounding skin inflamed. A careful ¢ examination may enable the medical man to fix the time approximatively. After death the question resolves itself into this, How long hae the deceased been dead? or it may consist of this and the former question together. The presence or absence of animal heat, the ex- istence or non-existence of rigidity ; the progress which putrefaction may have made, must be taken into the account, and, as has been already observed, these questions cannot be answered with any great precision. 4. OF WOUNDS AS THEY AFFECT THE SEVERAL PARTS OF THE BODY. There are two ways in which this division of the subject may be treated ; each region and part of the body may be handled separately, or the great systems, as the nervous, circulating, respiratory, &amp;c., may be considered in turn. The former plan has been preferred ; and, ac- cordingly, the several parts of the body will be passed briefly in re- view. Wounds of the Head.—Injuries to the scalp are of more importance than those of the integuments of other parts of the body. The danger arises partly from the peculiar tendency of the skin itself to take on the erysipelatous inflammation, partly from the great liability to injury of the tendon of the occipito-frontalis, and partly to the near prox- imity of the brain. As a general rule, incised wounds are attended with little danger, but punctured and contused wounds are of more importance ; the former by injuring the tendon, the latter by disor- ganizing the texture of the skin, and thus giving rise to a great de- gree of inflammation. In wounds of the scalp, as of other parts of the body, there is the greatest possible difference in different cases, a slight injury leading to fatal consequences in one instance, while in another, the nearly entire separation of the integuments from the bone will not be followed by a single bad symptom. ‘


[190/216 b3303073x_0002_0190.jp2]

370 WOUNDS. Fractures of the Skull are not of more importance than those of other bones, unless they are accompanied by injury to the brain or its membranes. But in this case, as in that of wounds of the scalp, a slight injury may lead to fatal consequences, while complete recovery may take place from one accompanied with the most severe and extensive injury to the brain. The force which occasions the frac- ture may, at the same time, produce concussion, or other injury to the brain. It is important also to understand, that a blow does not always fracture the bone on which it alights, but that it may produce a counter fracture at an opposite part of the skull. A severe blow on the vertex of the head, for instance, will often occasion a fracture at the base of the skull, and this is most likely to happen when the force is applied at once to a large surface. In forming an estimate of the danger attending fractures of the skull, it is necessary to bear in mind the variable thickness of its several parts. Thus, a blow on the temple would be productive of greater injury than one of equal force applied to other parts of the cranium. The orbitar plate is another part which by its extreme thinness exposes the brain to serious injury from thrusts with pointed instruments. The cribriform plate of the zthmoid bone again would be easily fractured, and the base of the brain be readily injured by a sharp-pointed instrument thrust up the nostril. Injury to the Brain itself may prove fatal, either by concussion, compression, or inflammation. Concussion.—This is a common effect of severe blows or violent shocks. The symptoms often follow immediately on the accident, and death takes place without re-action, or any improvement from the usual remedial means. In other cases the symptoms of concussion and compression are combined, and in others, again, concussion is followed by compression or inflammation. Several cases of death by concussion are on record, in which no lesion of the brain could be discovered. “ A prize-fighter was taken off the ground insensible, and appa- rently apoplectic, and died in eight hours. No lesion or extravasation could be discovered on careful inspection of the brain.”* The interval which elapses between the receipt of this form of injury, and the fatal termination is very various. It may prove fatal, as in the case just quoted, in a few hours, or after the lapse of several days, weeks, or even months. It is a remarkable circumstance connected with this class of injuries, that the patient sometimes seems to suffer little or no immediate incon- venience ; but, after the lapse of some days, is seized with symptoms of compression or of inflammation of the brain. The following are cases in illustration :—A woman, mentioned by Mr. Pott, received an injury on the head, and remained well for twelve days. She then fell ill, and died with symptoms of compression of the brain. The ventricles * Travers on Constitutional Irritation.


[191/216 b3303073x_0002_0191.jp2]

COMPRESSION OF THE BRAIN. 371: were found to contain bloody serum, and a small coagulum of blood.” A girl, aged thirteen, fell from a swing, and struck her head violently against the ground. For six weeks after the accident she complained of headache, but was not otherwise ill. Feverish symptoms then came on, followed by slight delirium and coma, and she died two months after the fall. Upon dissection the ventricles were found dis- tended with serous fluid, without any other morbid appearance. It is easy to understand how such cases as these might originate difficult questions in a court of law. A difficult question is apt to arise, when, in consequence of a fight between two parties, one of them falls, his head being first struck by his adversary, and then striking against the ground. In such a case it may be important to determine to which blow the injury and death are attributable. We shall derive material assistance in these cases from a comparison of the injury itself with the spot on which it took place. Compression.— This may be caused by depressed bone, or by the ef- fusion of blood or serum. The symptoms come on suddenly or gradu- ally, according to the nature of the compressing cause, and the fatal result follows in varying intervals of time. In cases of compression produced by depressed bone, the cause of death is obvious, and can give rise to little difficulty ; but when it arises from effusion of blood or serum following an injury, it is easy to allege that the effusion and - consequent fatal result were due, not to the injury itself, but to some concomitant circumstance. Thus, if in the course of a struggle a man is thrown down or struck, and dies soon after, with symptoms of compression, and it appears that an effusion of blood has taken place, the effusion may be attributed to the excitement of the contest, and not to the injury itself; and the question will be even more diffi- cult if the deceased was given to habits of intoxication, or was of a plethoric habit, and apoplectic make, or of an advanced age. Again, the inquiry will be still more difficult, if on dissection the vessels of the brain are found in a diseased state. The situation of the effused blood will assist us in determining this class of questions. It may be stated as a general rule, liable to few exceptions, that effusion rarely takes place on the surface of the brain from disease ; 1ts more common situation being the base, the ventricles, or the substance of the organ. The following case illustrates this class of questions :—A woman who had been much addicted to drinking, died soon after being struck by her husband, in a quarrel following a drunken fit. Several slight marks of contusions were found on the head, and blood was extrava- sated at the base of the brain from a ruptured artery. Sir Charles Bell gave it as his opinion, that the rupture might have taken place * Pott on Fractures. Case 38. ; + Abercrombie on Diseases of the Brain.


[192/216 b3303073x_0002_0192.jp2]

3/2 WOUNDS. from a slight injury or shock in this case, in consequence of morbid predisposition to it by the habits of the individual, and the excite- ment from the struggle with her husband.* The points which will chiefly demand our attention in such cases, will be the age of the deceased, and the relation which the effusion bears to the external injury. Spontaneous effusions of blood are very rare in young and middle-aged persons. Inflammation of the Brain.—It is necessary to bear in mind that inflammation of the brain is apt to follow upon injuries, not only to the organ itself, but to those of the scalp, and of the parts most nearly connected with the brain, such as the orbit, ear, &amp;c. With regard to inflammations and affections of the brain, the same observa- tions hold good which apply to the injuries already considered. A slight injury may give rise to very severe inflammation, a severe injury to very slight effects. The period at which inflammation sets in is also very variable. .As a general rule, it does not follow directly upon the injury, but some days or weeks may elapse before it takes place. In some cases it is a consequence of concussion or follows upon symptoms of compression, in others it is quite independent of both. The following case illustrates this point :— J. Bell was tried at Edinburgh, November 1836, for the murder of J. Kerr, aged twenty-two, by having struck him on the forehead with a hoe. The blow caused a compound, much comminuted, and de- pressed fracture of the skull. On the day after receiving the injury, Kerr was brought to the Royal Infirmary. He walked up stairs to his bed, and did not seem very ill. Symptoms of inflammation came on, and he died seven days after the injury. On dissection, there was inflammation of the membranes, and an abscess in the substance of the brain, below the seat of the injury. Injuries of the head, then, have this peculiarity, that at first they often appear of little consequence, but after a considerable interval dangerous symptoms may arise and prove fatal. In the interval which elapses between the receipt of the injury and the accession of dangerous symptoms, there is always room for neglect or mismanage- ment, on the part of the patient, his friends, or the medical attendant, which may materially affect the question,—Was the injury the cause of death ? This question, therefore, has a peculiar application to inju- ries of the head. Injuries to the Spine may be mentioned in this place, as being closely connected with those of the head. These injuries generally prove fatal, the interval varying according to the degree of violence used and the part of the spine which has been wounded. Serious injury to the upper part of the cord proves immediately fatal by paralyzing the muscles of respiration ; but when the lower part of the cord is injured, * Shaw’s Manual of Anatomy. { Watson’s Medico-legal Treatise on Homicide, p. 63.


[193/216 b3303073x_0002_0193.jp2]

WOUNDS OF THE HEAD. 373 there is loss of power and sensation in the parts below the seat of injury, and disturbance of the functions of the viscera, which sooner or later prove fatal. Many injuries to the brain principally affect the base, and by causing pressure on the medulla oblongata paralyze the nerves supplying the muscles of respiration. Injuries to the spinal cord are comparatively rare, and seldom give rise to questions of a medico-legal nature. Wounds of the Face.—This class of injuries obviously produces great disfigurement, and, in consequence of the large distribution of important nerves over the face, still more grave inconvenience. From the near proximity of the principal features to the brain, there is also a risk of injury to that organ, as well as of inflammation extend- ing from the seat of the wound. In this respect the wounds of the integuments of the face come next in importance to those affecting the scalp. Wounds of the Throat.—These injuries are important from their frequency. They are the chosen mode of death with a great majority of suicides, and sometirmes a murderer inflicts a wound on the same part in the hope that his victim will be supposed to have committed suicide. The degree of danger depends upon the position and the parts impli- cated. Wounds of the anterior part of the throat are less dangerous than those of the side of the neck; those of the lower part of the throat, less so than those of the upper part. A division of the carotid artery is almost necessarily fatal, and that of the internal jugu- lar vein is attended with great danger from the hemorrhage as well as from the risk of phlebitis. Wounds of the larynx or trachea are attended with comparatively little danger, and those of the trachea are less important than those of the larynx. The points which most re- quire attention in wounds of the throat are the extent and direction of the wound, its regularity or irregularity, and the position of the in- strument of death. These points have been already referred to. The question, Was the wound the cause of death ? finds less place in this class of injuries than in those affecting the head; but there is one question of considerable interest relating to wounds of the throat, and that is, What amount of voluntary motion is possible after the receipt of a severe wound? Thisinquiry has an important bearing on the question, Was the wound suicidal or homicidal ? The case of Captain Wright, who shared the captivity of Sir Sidney Smith, in France, and his celebrated escape from the Temple, and who had the misfortune to be taken a second time and imprisoned in the same place, illustrates the importance of this question. He was one morning found dead in his bed with his throat cut, and the razor closed in his hand. It appears from the procés verbal, that the “* corpse had the throat cut, and held a razor shut in the right hand.” M. Soufé, who inspected the body, deposed, “ That on examining the corpse, he observed a transverse wound situated on the anterior and superior parts of the throat, above the bone termed juxoid, in


[194/216 b3303073x_0002_0194.jp2]

374 WOUNDS. length about eighteen centimétres, penetrating into the cervical verte- bra, which wound appears to have been effected by an edged instrument, such as a razor, which in its course has cut the skin, the muscles, the tracheal artery, the cesophagus, and sanguineous vessels of the part, whence has issued a considerable effusion of blood, and the prompt death of the said Wright.” The fact of the razor being found closed in the hand, is corroborated by one of the witnesses, who, on seeing the body, exclaimed, “ the man who cuts his own throat does not shut the razor for the use of another.” The circumstances of the case are involved in so much mystery that it is impossible to determine by the evidence collected with great pains by Sir Sidney Smith, whether Wright really committed suicide or not. But it is easy to show that the mere fact of the deceased being found with the razor closed in his hand does not militate very strongly against the supposition of suicide ; for, in the case of the suicide of a military officer, which occurred in September 1838, the head was found nearly severed from the body, and there was no room to doubt the fact of suicide, yet the razor did not fall from the hand, but was placed upon the dressing-table. In a more recent case, a madman after inflicting a severe wound on his throat had time to struggle with the maid-servant before he fell down dead, In Oc- tober 1833, a man committed suicide while walking along Oxford- street, by cutting his throat with a razor. After having inflicted the wound, he was observed to hold a handkerchief to his neck, and run forwards. He fell dead on the pavement, having run about four yards from the spot where he wounded himself. The razor was found firmly grasped in his hand. On an examination of the body, it was ascertained that the carotid artery and several of its branches, with the jugular vein on one side, as also the trachea, had been completely cut through. The surgeon gave it as his opinion at the inquest, that from the character of the wound the deceased must have fallen dead on the spot; and although it was possible that he might have run so far as stated after the infliction of the wound, yet such a cireum- stance would be quite unusual.* In the remarkable case of Mary Green, who was murdered in 1832 by John Danks, the confession of the culprit, and the circumstantial evidence coincided to prove that, after a wound which divided the trunk of the carotid artery, and all the principal branches of the external carotid, with the jugulars, the female must have risen from the ground, run a distance of twenty-three yards, and climbed over a low gate. From actual trial it appeared that it must have taken at least from fifteen to twenty seconds to run from the spot on which the murder was committed to that on which the body was found.+ Wounds of the Chest.——Incised wounds of the parietes of the chest * Taylor’s Elements of Medical Jurisprudence, p. 444. + See the case more at length in Mr. Taylor’s work, p. 442.


[195/216 b3303073x_0002_0195.jp2]

WOUNDS OF THE LUNGS AND HEART. 375 are not attended with any peculiar danger, but severe contused wounds by causing fracture of the bones, and consequent injury of the internal parts, often prove fatal. The fatal result is due either to extensive rupture of the viscera, to hemorrhage, or to inflammation. Severe contusions of the chest may also terminate fatally by the shock which they occasion. This class of injuries is of common occurrence in prize-fights, in falls from great heights, and from heavy objects crush- ing the chest. Penetrating wounds of the chest are dangerous, inas- much as they can scarcely fail to injure some important organ, occa- sioning thereby fatal hemorrhage or severe subsequent inflammation. Wounds of the Lungs——Hemorrhage is the immediate consequence of this class of injuries. The blood may be discharged by the wound, or by expectoration, or it may accumulate in the cavity of the pleura. When the large vessels are wounded the hemorrhage is copious and speedily fatal. An injury to the substance of the lung itself is not necessarily fatal, for patients have recovered after removal of a portion of the lung, and, in rare instances, foreign bodies, such as bullets, have remained in the lung for years, and have been enclosed in a cyst. In- flammation is a common consequence of wounds of the lung, especially when a foreign substance has been forced into the wound, as happens in injuries with fire-arms. Cases of wounds of the lungs require careful management, and long-continued rest, as without it injuries which have been repaired may be reproduced. Emphysema is a fa- miliar effect of this class of wounds. When judiciously treated it does not materially increase the danger. Wounds of the Heart.—Penetrating wounds of the heart, are neces- sarily speedily fatal from hemorrhage, unless they pass so obliquely through the parietes that the flap acts like a valve, or a foreign body happen to plug the orifice; death may be delayed, in these cases, for some hours, or even days. The rapidity with which death takes place will depend upon the situation of the wound. Thus wounds of the base will prove less speedily fatal than those of the apex, and su- perficial wounds dividing the vessels of the heart less promptly than those which penetrate its cavities. John Bell gives the case of a sol- dier, in whom the apex of the heart was cut with the point of a very long and slender sword, and this soldier lived twelve hours, during which time, as appeared after his death, the heart had, at every stroke, been losing a small quantity of blood, till, in twelve hours, it entirely filled the chest, and the patient was suffocated and died. Another man was wounded with a sword, the point of which cut the coronary artery, which threw out its blood so slowly, that it was two hours before the pericardium filled with blood, and then, after great anxiety, the patient died.* In very rare instances, when the wound does not prove fatal by hemorrhage, complete recovery has taken place. A case, for instance, is related by Fournier, and authenticated by M. * Principles of Surgery, vol. i. p. 468.


[196/216 b3303073x_0002_0196.jp2]

376 . WOUNDS. Mansen, chief surgeon to the hospital at Orleans, of a patient, who not only survived a wound of the heart, but may be said to have * made a perfect recovery from it, inasmuch as he died at the distance of six years after the receipt of the injury, from disease unconnected with it, and the ball was found embedded in the heart. M.M. Ollivier the heart, with a view of determining the probable period at which these injuries prove fatal. Out of twenty-nine cases of wounds of the cavities of the heart only two proved fatal within forty-eight hours. In the remaining cases, death took place in periods varying from four to twenty-eight days.” Wounds of the Aorta and Pulmonary Artery are necessarily fatal ; but patients have been known to live a few days after small punc- tured wounds even of the aorta. Wounds of the Gisophagus and Thoracic Duct.—Such injuries are necessarily rare from the great depth at which these parts he. They would be dangerous from the extravasation of their contents. Orfila, however, mentions a case of recovery from a bayonet-wound of the cesophagus.+ Wounds of the Diaphragm.—Punctured wounds of the diaphragm itself do not appear to be attended with great danger, but they are rarely uncombined with injury to the parts above or below. Hernia of the stomach has sometimes followed these injuries, and proved fatal. Rupture of the diaphragm from severe blows or falls is not an uncom- mon occurrence. In the majority of cases the rupture is attended by a fatal shock to the nervous system, and death is immediate. In other instances it takes place after a longer interval, from the protrusion of the viscera of the abdomen into the chest, and the consequent disturbance of the functions of-the organs contained in one or both of those cavities. Wounds of the Abdomen.—W ounds of the parietes of the abdomen may be attended with serious consequences. Death may take place in incised wounds from a division of the epigastric artery. As in the scalp, so here, there is additional danger from wounds of the tendons of the muscles, and the consequent accumulation of matter beneath them. Ventral hernia is a remote consequence of wounds of the parietes of the abdomen. Contusions of the abdomen are generally attended with serious consequences. Sudden death from shock, hemorrhage from rupture of the viscera, and inflammation, are the chief causes of death. The liver and spleen are the organs most liable to suffer injury, and rupture of their substance is not uncommon. Wounds of the Liver—Penetrating wounds of this organ, when they extend to any depth, are apt to prove fatal by dividing some of the large vessels. In other cases the danger arises from inflammation of the organ. Wounds of the gall-bladder prove fatal by causing effusion of bile, and consequent peritonzeal inflammation. * Dict. des Sciences Médicales, art. Cas rares. + Vol. ii. p. 483.


[197/216 b3303073x_0002_0197.jp2]

a WOUNDS OF THE VISCERA. STF Wounds of the Spleen—Deep wounds are fatal by hemorrhage; but recovery may take place from superficial wounds. Wounds -of the Stomach.—These prove fatal by the shock to the ° nervous system, by hemorrhage, if the large vessels are divided, by the extravasation of the contents and consequent peritonzeal inflamma- tion, and by inflammation of the viscus itself. Wounds of the sto- mach, however, are not necessarily fatal, and many cases of recovery are recorded, even when the wound was extensive, and the stomach distended with food at the time of the injury. Wounds of the Intestines.—These injuries may prove fatal in the same ways as those of the stomach, viz., by hemorrhage, by effusion of their contents, and consequent peritonzeal inflammation, or by inflam- mation of the part itself. The danger is greater in the small than in the large intestines, in consequence of the more fluid state of their contents, and the greater risk of extravasation. For the same reason, wounds of the duodenum are more dangerous than those of the other small intestines. In the absence of extravasation, there is a fair chance of recovery from wounds of the intestines by the effusion and organization of coagulable lymph about the edges of the incision. Wounds of the Kidneys——The kidneys are chiefly exposed to injury from blows and stabs in the loins. Penetrating wounds of these organs may prove fatal, in consequence of hemorrhage, extravasation of urine, or inflammation. If means are taken to prevent the urine from being effused into the peritoneeal cavity, recovery may take place. Wounds of the Bladder are chiefly dangerous from extravasation of urine, which is, of course, most apt to occur when the organ is dis- tended. In the absence of effusion they may prove fatal by the in- flammation to which they lead. Wounds of the Genital Organs.—A removal of the penis, if not fatal by hemorrhage, is not dangerous ; but an incised wound of the ure- thra entails the risk of extravasation of urine into the cellular mem- brane and fatal sloughing. The removal of the testicles is attended with less danger than a contusion. This latter injury sometimes proves fatal by the shock to the nervous system. Wounds of the spermatic cord: occasion dangerous hemorrhage. The complete re- moval of all the parts of generation of the male has in many instances led to no bad result. Deep wounds of the labia of the female are dangerous from hemorrhage, Fatal injuries have been inflicted on the uterus, bladder, or rectum, or on the large vessels of the pelvis, by instruments introduced into the vagina. The narrow limits of this work preclude a more detailed notice of injuries as they affect the several organs of the body. The reader is, therefore, referred for more minute information on this subject to Mr. Watson’s Medico-legal Treatise on Homicide, and to Mr. Alfred Taylor’s Elements of Medical Jurisprudence, p. 264 to p. 501. ¥ 26


[198/216 b3303073x_0002_0198.jp2]

378 CHAPTER X. | eae BY FIRE.—SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION. DEATH BY LIGHTNING.—COLD.—STARVATION. THESE subjects are included in the same chapter, not from any resemblance which they bear to each other, but because they have no immediate connexion with any of the foregoing, and are not of sufficient importance to form the subject of distinct chapters. DEATH BY FIRE. Was the Burn inflicted during Life or after Death ?— Cases.— Eaperi- ments of Christison.— Characters of Burns produced after Death. The questions which arise in reference to death by fire, are similar to those relating to other forms of external injury, except that the al- ternatives of suicide and homicide seem to be, from the nature of the case, excluded ; for it is highly improbable, that either a suicide or a murderer would choose such a mode of death. The main question then is, whether the burning was accidental or intentional. If acci- dental we shall have marks of the burning having taken place during life ; intentional burning of a body would be resorted to after death by a murderer anxious to conceal the real cause and mode of death, and in such a case these marks would be absent. Hence the ques- tion Did the Burning take place during Life or after Death? becomes of unusual importance. It may be well to illustrate this question by two cases, one of which occurred before we were furnished with any means of discrimination, and the other after. ; A man of the name of Gilchrist, some time ago, was condemned and executed at Glasgow. He and his wife lived in an irregular: rambling sort of way, getting drunk sometimes for days together. On one occasion, after their return home in the evening, the people who lived on the floor above them, heard a noise like that of two persons struggling, and soon afterwards a rattling, or gurgling, and moaning, as “of one choking or bleeding to death. They so strongly suspected that all was not ‘Tight, that they called down to Gilchrist, through the floor, that they were afraid he was killing his wife. ne * no long time they were alarmed by the smell of fire, and the filling of the house with smoke, upon which they went down to Gilchrist’s


[199/216 b3303073x_0002_0199.jp2]

WAS THE BURN INFLICTED DURING LIFE OR AFTER DEATH ? 379 apartment and demanded admission. After some delay . alasited them, and in doing so appeared to them to have come out of an inner room, where he said he had been asleep in bed. On letting them in he stumbled over the dead body of his wife, which was in the outer apartment, in a kneeling posture, supported by a chair, and very much burnt. Gilchrist was accused of having murdered his wife, and burned the body to conceal the manner of her “death. He, on the other hand, alleged, that he had gone to bed tired, and knew nothing of what had “befallen her until he was awakened ; ; and, that he presumed her clothes had caught fire while she was intoxicated, and that she was thus burnt to death. What remained of the body was examined by medical men ; but their report was merely, that the body was so much burnt that nothing could be learnt from it as to the cause of death. The man was hanged, to the last vehemently and solemnly denying that he was guilty. Now this man may have been justly or unjustly condemned. The case is quoted to show, that at the time at which this trial took place the medical man did not possess any means of distinguishing a burn inflicted during life from one produced after death. This was the be little doubt, that if such means of discrimination had existed, the body was not too much injured to prevent the employment of them. The following case closely resembles the foregoing, and the circum- stances connected with it were equally suspicious. It is extremely in- structive, because the medical evidence, so unfortunately defective in the former case, led, in this instance, to the acquittal of the accused party. ‘A woman was found dead and severely burnt. Her husband was suspected of having killed her, and of having afterwards burned the body. He and his wife lived together on bad terms. On the night of her death the woman had returned home at a late hour, after hay- ing lighted a candle and got some whiskey at a neighbour’s house. At this time certainly the husband was in bed ; but, some time after- wards, there was heard a considerable noise, like that of struggling, and of chairs pushed up and down the room. Not very long after, the neighbours were alarmed by a strong smell of fire, proceeding from the apartments which the man and his wife occupied. They therefore knocked at his door for admission, but in vain ; all the noise they could make did not bring him to the door. At last a man forced his way in, by breaking the window of the outer room, and on enter- ing found the room full of smoke, and observed something burning red in the corner, over which he instantly threw a pitcher of water :—it was the body of the woman burning on the hearth. Several persons now entered the inner room ; they found the husband either asleep, or feigning to be so. On being roused and told of his wife’s death, he expressed neither surprise nor sorrow, but coolly demanded by what authority the people had broken into his house. The presumptions were strong against him ; they were completely removed by the result of a


[200/216 b3303073x_0002_0200.jp2]

380 DEATH BY FIRE. scientific investigation suggested by certain appearances on the dead body. The burns on those parts of the body which were not reduced to a cinder, exhibited peculiar characters, which appeared to the medi- cal examiners to indicate that the burning had taken place during life. This idea led to the institution of a series of experiments, with a view to ascertain whether a part of the body burnt during life, and a part burnt after the extinction of life, present the same or different appear- ances ; and, if different, whether the differences are definite and con- stant. The result of this inquiry was, the discovery of the means of determining with precision, in every case in which the whole of the body is not reduced to a cinder, whether the body were alive or dead when burnt. In this case it was proved, that the woman had been set on fire whilst still alive, and had died in consequence of the burning. We owe our knowledge of the diagnostic marks of burns inflicted during life and after death to the experiments of Dr. Christison. A burn inflicted during life has the following appearances :—Immediately surrounding the burnt spot there is a narrow white line ; external to this a second of a deep-red tint ; and this latter, at its outer edge, runs by insensible degrees into a diffused redness. The diffused redness may be removed by gentle pressure, and disappears after death; the deep red line, however, is permanent. These appearances are observable in from five to fifteen, and occasionally as late as thirty seconds after the burn. The next appearance in point of order is that of blisters filled with serum. 'The period at which the blisters rise has not been accurately determined, but im most cases a very few minutes. suffice to produce them. If, therefore, life is extinct within a few minutes of the injury, blisters may be altogether absent. After scalds, vesica- tions make their appearance in a very few minutes, but in young children it is said that they are some hours before they appear. Vesi- cation is not an invariable effect of the application of heated bodies. The appearances after death according to the experiments of Christi- son, vary with the time which has elapsed since the death. Dr. Christison was unable, in any case, to produce the deep red line, not removable by pressure; and although blisters were produced in some of the experiments, they were filled with air, not with fluid ; and on the removal of the cuticle, the cutis was found free from moisture. As some of the experiments were made ten minutes after death, the distinctive marks thus established apply to all periods beyond that time. In about an hour after death, it seems that it is not possible to produce any appearances which can be mistaken for vital changes ; the application of heat merely having the effect of ruffling the cuticle, and drying up the parts to which the heated body is applied. In one of Christison’s experiments, boiling water was poured in a continued stream on the breast, and on the outside of one of the legs ten minutes after death. The body was examined within thirty-six hours. On the leg no trace whatever of the action of heat could be


[201/216 b3303073x_0002_0201.jp2]

SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION. 381 discovered. The breast was of a very pale brownish hue, the cuticle slightly shrivelled, dry, brittle, and easily scratched off. ‘The surface of the true skin below was dry, and around the burnt part there was not a vestige of redness or blistering. In another instance, in which heat was applied to an amputated leg, ten minutes after its removal, a blis- ter was raised which contained air, but no water. The deep red line, and the vesicle filled with serum, may therefore be regarded as vital changes. Another question which may arise in the case of persons found burnt is, whether the burning originated in causes external or internal to the body ; in other words, whether it is possible that the body could have been consumed by internal heat, spontaneously generated. This question must be the subject of a separate heading. SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION. Medico-Legal Case.—Case of Grace Pett.—Orfila’s Description of tts Phenomena.—Consists in an unusual Combustibility of the Body. The following case, which rests on the authority of Le Cat, a firm believer in the doctrine of spontaneous combustion, forms a fitting in- troduction to this subject. It is said to have taken place in 1725. A man of the name of Millet, living at Rheims, was charged with the murder of his wife. It appears that the body of the deceased was found lying in the kitchen of the house at a short distance from the hearth, entirely consumed. A part of the head only, with a portion of the lower extremities, and a few of the vertebra, had escaped combustion. The floor beneath the body was partially burnt. The prisoner in his defence, stated that he and his wife had retired to rest the previous evening,—-that his wife, not being able to sleep, got up and went into the kitchen, as he supposed to warm herself. He was awakened by the smell of fire, and going down into the kitchen, discovered the deceased lying near the hearth in the manner stated. The prisoner was condemned to death for the murder, but, on appeal to a higher court, the sentence was revoked, and it was pro- nounced to have been a case of spontaneous human combustion. In this case the extent to which the body was consumed might lend some support to the opinion, that it was more combustible than human bodies in general, but it gives no countenance to the notion that the fire originated in the body itself. It was certainly in the most favourable circumstances for being set on fire. Now what oc- curred in this case seems to have happened in all the reported cases of spontaneous combustion; that is to say, the body was found in such a position as that it might have been set on fire. This remark applies to the following case, which occurred, so recently as 1774, in our own country, at Ipswich.


[202/216 b3303073x_0002_0202.jp2]

382 SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION. A fisherman’s wife of the name of Grace Pett, of the Parish of St. Clements, had been in the habit for several years of going down stairs every night after she was half-undressed, to smoke a pipe. She did this on the evening of the 9th of April, 1774. Her daughter, who lay in the same bed with her, had fallen asleep, and did not miss her mother till she awoke early in the morning. Upon dressing herself, and going down stairs she found her mother’s body lying on the right side with her head against the grate, and extended over the hearth with her legs on the deal floor, and appearing like a block of wood burning with a glowing fire without flame. Upon quenching the fire with two bowls of water, the neighbours, whom the cries of the daughter had brought in, were almost stifled with the smell. The trunk of the unfortunate woman was nearly consumed, and appeared like a heap of charcoal covered with white ashes. The head, arms, legs, and thighs, were also much burned. There was no fire what- ever in the grate, and the candle was burned out in the socket of the candlestick, which stood by her. The clothes of a child on one side of her, and a paper screen on the other, were untouched ; and the deal floor was neither singed nor discoloured. It was said that the woman had drank plentifully of gin over night, in welcoming a daughter who had recently returned from Gibraltar.* All the other cases, which are given with sufficient minuteness, resemble the two foregoing, in the fact of the parties having had access to fire. Orfila testifies his belief in spontaneous human combustion by thus describing the phenomena which accompany it: A light blue flame appears over the part which is about to be attacked: this flame is not readily extinguished by water, and indeed frequently the addition of this liquid only serves to increase its activity. Deep eschars now form in the part affected, accompanied by convulsions, delirium, vomit- ing, and diarrhea, followed by a peculiar state of putrefaction, and death. The process is said to advance with extreme rapidity, but the body is never entirely consumed: some parts are only half burnt, while others are completely incinerated, a carbonaceous, fetid, unctuous ash remaining. The hands and feet commonly escape destruction, while the trunk is usually entirely dissipated. The wooden and other combustible articles of furniture situated near the individual, are either uninjured, or but imperfectly consumed ; the clothes, however, cover- ing the body, are commonly destroyed. The walls and furniture of the apartment are covered with a thick greasy soot, and the air is im- pregnated with an offensive empyreumatic odour. This phenomenon is stated to have been chiefly observed in corpulent females, advanced in life, and especially in those subjects who had been long addicted to the abuse of spirituous liquors. It is, perhaps, practically of little consequence whether the doctrine * Brewster, Natural Magic, pp. 324-5.


[203/216 b3303073x_0002_0203.jp2]

a) ioe DEATH BY LIGHTNING. 383 of spontaneous combustion be true or false. The cases on record may be fairly allowed to prove an unusual degree of combustibility of the human body, occurring in rare instances and, for the most part, in corpulent spirit-drinking females, merely requiring to be set on fire, and needing no other fuel but their clothes, or night-dress. Till we possess cases better authenticated, and more accurately re- ported, we must content ourselves with this amount of knowledge. The arguments advanced on both sides of the question have little weight; for, to those who assert the extreme improbability of a human body, which ordinarily requires for its destruction a large amount of fuel, being ever consumed when the only fuel consists of a night-dress, the cases reported in the last section may be opposed ; for in those cases a very large part of the body was consumed. On the other hand, to those who strive to explain spontaneous combustion by an electric theory, it may be objected, that though well authenticated cases of the body becoming highly electric, are recorded, no pheeno- mena allied to spontaneous combustion occurred in those cases. The spontaneous combustion of inorganic substances is a subject of much interest and importance, but it has no medico-legal bearing. DEATH BY LIGHTNING. Post-mortem Appearances.—Cause of Death.—State of the Dress and of Objects found on the Person.—Cases. Death by lightning rarely gives rise to questions of a medico-legal nature ; but inasmuch as the effects sometimes produced on the body, both externally and internally, resemble those inflicted by mechanical violence, a question might possibly arise, whether a person found dead, under unknown circumstances, had perished from the effects of lightning, or had been murdered. In the majority of cases we shall have a clue to the cause of death, by knowing that a thunder-storm has taken place near the spot on which a body is found. ‘This fact being ascertained, we shall next have to inquire what probability there was of the body having been struck by lightning. Asa general rule it may be stated, that the electric fluid prefers and seeks out good conductors; and as the human body is a very good conductor of electricity, it is as likely to be struck as any object similarly situated, unless, perhaps, that object be of metal. Lofty objects are more likely to be struck than low ones. Hence we might expect that where the human body is surrounded by objects much more elevated than itself it should escape. Although this is a general rule, it does not hold universally. Thus, ina remarkable case quoted by Mr. Taylor,* two persons were struck though they were * Hlements, p. 228.


[204/216 b3303073x_0002_0204.jp2]

384 DEATH BY LIGHTNING. situated in a deep hollow, surmounted by a lofty tree. They were travelling in a vehicle, which contained, of course, a large quantity of metal, and furnished a better conductor than surrounding objects of greater elevation. It is well known that trees are often struck by lightning ; and the danger of remaining under a tree during a storm is proverbial, It has been thought that a person is tolerably safe in an open space far from any object which could attract the electric fluid ; but this is an error. The human body may be, in these peace the most prominent object, and, at the same, the best conductor. It is now understood that death may be caused by an electric shock, other than the lightning stroke. This takes place when a cloud, in near proximity to the earth, is negatively electrified, whilst the earth is positive. ‘The human body is here made the conductor, by means of which the equilibrium is restored. This is called the ascending or returning stroke. It is not necessary to enlarge on the difference which exists in the relative conducting power of different substances. It is well known that metals are good conductors. It is on this account that they are employed to protect houses and ships from lightning. So, also, sub- stances which, in their dry state, are bad conductors of electricity, become very good ones when moistened. It happens, therefore, that the string of a kite moistened by a shower, or the moistened ropes of a vessel, becomes a good conductor of lightning. The violent effects produced by the electric discharge—the dis- ruption of the several parts of a building; the violent separation of the good conductors from. the bad ones; the fusion of metallic sub- stances ; the ignition of inflammable ones; the magnetic properties communicated to articles of iron and steel—are familiarly known. The Post-mortem appearances in the bodies of those who have been struck by lightning are very various. Sometimes no marks of vio- lence are found on the body, and this is said to occur most commonly in cases of death produced by the returning stroke. At other times the body presents marks of violence, such as contusion and laceration about the spot where the electric fluid has entered ; occasionally there is merely a small round hole at the point of exit ; at other times there is an extensive ecchymosis, and this is most commonly found on the back, the electric fluid appearing to prefer the track of the spinal marrow. Frac- ture of the bones isa rare occurrence. One case of extensive fracture of the bones of the skull is related by Pouillet. Marks of burns are not frequently met with, and probably never, except in cases where the clothes have been set on fire. The blood is said to be fluid, and this was the opinion of John Hunter. Sir C. Scudamore, however, has found, on examining the bodies of animals killed by electricity, that the blood in the veins was always coagulated. It is said, that the bodies of persons killed by lightning do not grow rigid. This opin- ion, too, is erroneous, for Sir B. Brodie has observed, that animals


[205/216 b3303073x_0002_0205.jp2]

CAUSE OF DEATH. 385 killed by the electrive spark become rigid after death. Dr. Francis also states, that the bodies of those who are struck by lightning do not always remain flaccid, and that he has seen a case where the muscles became immediately excessively rigid. He also refers to Beccaria fora similar example. Putrefaction is also said to be hastened. But this admits of doubt. It must at least be recollected, that these accidents usually occur in summer, when putrefaction takes place very speedily. The fact is, that with regard to the fluid state of the blood, and the occurrence of cadaverous rigidity and putrefaction, fresh observations are required. But even should it be clearly made out that the blood is fluid, cadaverous rigidity absent, and putrefaction hastened, these cir- cumstances could not be considered peculiar to death by lightning, for there is reason to believe, that all of them may occur in other modes of sudden death. But we are not always dependent upon such doubtful signs as these. The state of the objects which are carried about the person may furnish very complete evidence of the cause of death. The clothes may be torn and burnt ; the several metallic bodies contained in the pockets of the deceased may be fused, and, at the same time, forcibly carried to a distance from the body; and, in some cases, we shall find articles of iron or steel rendered strongly magnetic. This has happened with regard to the steel of the stays, or the main-spring of a watch. Cause of Death.— When the body is struck by lightning the nervous system is the part which chiefly suffers. If death takes place, it is through the shock sustained by it ; or if a less degree of injury is in- flicted, it is manifested on the brain, spinal marrow, or nerves. Hence the loss of sight, of sensation, or of voluntary motion, temporarily or permanently due to this cause. On account of the unimportant medico-legal bearing of this subject, it is unnecessary to treat it with any degree of minuteness. It will be sufficient, therefore, to add one or two cases by way of illustration. Professor Rickman, of St. Petersburg, was killed by electricity in the year 1753. He was engaged in some experiments upon atmos- pheric electricity, with his engraver, Sokolow. Having placed him- self near the apparatus during a storm, in order to examine the elec- trometer, a large ball of fire appeared to flash from the conducting-rod to the head of the professor, and he instantly fell lifeless. On exa- mining the body, there was found a single red spot on the forehead, at the point where the electric current entered; it appeared to have completely traversed his body, bursting open his shoe, and singeing part of his dress, but without producing any other marks of violence on his person. The following case is quoted from Pouillet’s work :— “In July, 1819, the electric fluid struck the church of the village of Chateauneuf-les-Moustiers, situated on one of the summits of the. Lower Alps. Divine service was being performed, when three loud


[206/216 b3303073x_0002_0206.jp2]

386 DEATH BY LIGHTNING. claps of thunder were heard, the Missal was suddenly torn out of the hands of a person officiating, and, at the same instant, this person, with the curate and the greater number of the congregation was vio- lently thrown down, and all were more or less injured. The Curate, who was taken up in a state of insensibility, was soon restored by the application of proper means. On examination, it was found that the electric current had first struck the gold lace on the upper part of his dress, thence it had taken its course down his body, producing some severe injuries, and probably the greater part of it escaped by the seat on which he was sitting, for this was found broken to pieces. A por- tion of the current had gone down to his foot, had broken the metallic button of the shoe, which was torn open, and had transported it to some distance. The arms of this person remained in a state of pa- _ ralysis for two months afterwards; eight individuals were killed on the spot, and eighty-two were more or less injured, a great number of whom suffered from paralysis of the legs. One of the priests who was dressed in a silk robe, escaped without any injury. The steeple of the church was subsequently found at some distance from the spot, and the floor of the chapel was pierced in several places by large holes, through which it is supposed the electric current had passed into the earth.’”?*.. It appears, then, that the effects produced by lightning are similar to those of various forms of mechanical injury, sometimes resembling a bruise, sometimes a burn; but that occasionally no marks whatever of the injury are present. We shall generally be able to discover the real cause of death by the knowledge that a thunder-storm has taken place ;—by. the injury sustained by surrounding objects; by the state of the dress ; the fusion or ignition of metallic or other substances car- ried about the person; and sometimes by the magnetic properties communicated to articles of iron or steel. The pathological appearances are not in themselves sufficiently marked to enable us to speak with certainty. DEATH FROM COLD. Effects of intense Cold.—Closely resemble those of Intoxication. — Vary in different Persons.—Circumstances which increase the Eefect of Cold on the Body.—Post-mortem Appearances—not in themselves conclu- sive. Death from cold is an uncommon eyent in this country, though death by cold and inanition combined is not of very rare occurrence in severe winters. The first effect of intense cold is a sensation of numb- ness and stiffness in the muscles of the limbs and face, with pallor of the skin. This is followed by speedy loss of sensibility, torpor, and profound sleep, from which the person is with great difficulty roused. All the vital functions gradually cease, and death finally ensues. * Traité de Physique, Art. Electricité Atmosphérique.


[207/216 b3303073x_0002_0207.jp2]

DEATH FROM FIRE. 387 Whilst the cold drives the blood from the surface, it, of course, tends to accumulate it in the interior of the body, so that the great vessels of the spleen, liver, lungs, and brain are more or less gorged with blood. The temperature of the blood itself is lowered; the heart contracts slowly and feebly, and the pulse becomes small and thready. Priapism sometimes results from congestion of the vessels of the penis. : On the nervous system the effects of cold are manifested by numb- ness, torpor, somnolency, giddiness, dimness of sight, tetanus, and para- lysis. The appearance of persons suffering from intense cold, indeed, closely resembles the effect of intoxication. This effect of severe cold has been often witnessed in expeditions to the North Pole, and Captain Parry thus describes the state of some of his crew, on their return to the vessel, after long exposure to cold :—“ When I sent for them into my cabin, they looked wild, spoke thick and indistinctly, and it was impossible to draw from them a rational answer to any of our questions. After being on board for a short time, the mental fa- culties appeared gradually to return with the returning circulation, and it was not till then that a looker-on could easily persuade himself that they had not been drinking too freely.” ‘I have more than once seen our people ina state so exactly resembling that of the most stupid intoxication, that I should certainly have charged them with that offence, had I not been quite sure that no possible means were afford- ed them in Melville Island, to procure anything stronger than snow- water.” * : All the symptoms here mentioned seem to point to the nervous system as that chiefly affected by cold, and the cause of death is there- fore in some way or other connected with this effect on the nervous centres. The effect of cold varies in intensity in different persons with varia- tions in age, strength, &amp;c.: the young, the aged, the infirm, persons worn out by disease or fatigue, and those addicted to the use of intoxi- cating liquors, perish most promptly in the depth of winter. We often hear of the death of such persons in the streets of London. It, would appear, too, that independent of these circumstances, some per- sons have a great advantage over others in their power of resisting cold, a fact frequently observed by voyagers and travellers in the Arctic regions. It may be well to allude to some of the circumstances which cause the impression of cold on the body to be severely felt, and which give rise to effects not indicated by the height at which the thermometer stands. The body is cooled in three ways—by cutaneous exhalation ; by conduction from the direct contact of air ; and by radiation. * Expedition to the North Pole, vol.i, p. 108.


[208/216 b3303073x_0002_0208.jp2]

388 DEATH. FROM COLD. The cutaneous exhalation is increased by dry air, and suppressed by moisture, and so far the heat of the body is affected by this cause. On the other hand the body is cooled by conduction, when the air is moist ; so that the body is cooled alike by dry cold air and by cold moist air. Of the effect of cold humid winds in lowering the temperature of the body, a good example is given by Dr. Currie in the Philosophical Transactions of 1792: “ Of several individuals that clung to a wreck, two sat on the only part that was not submerged ; of the others, all were constantly im- . mersed in the sea, and most of them up to the shoulders. Three only perished, two of whom were generally out of the sea, but frequently overwhelmed by the surge, and at all other times exposed to heavy showers of sleet and snow, and to a high and piercing wind. Of these two, one died after four hours’ exposure,—the second died three hours later, although a strong healthy adult, and inured to cold and hardship. The third that perished was a weakly man, The remain- ing eleven who had been more or less completely submerged, were taken from the wreck next day after twenty-three hours’ exposure and recovered. The person among the whole who seemed to have suffered least was a negro: of the other survivors, several were by no means strong men, and most of them had been inured to the warm climate of Carolina.” A rapid renewal of the air, as ina brisk cold wind, lowers the temperature of the body by evaporation and by conduction at the same time, and the effect of a slight breeze in increasing the feeling of cold is familiar to every one, and was remarkably exhibited in the ex- peditions to the polar seas. Post-mortem Appearances.—The surface of the body is pallid, and the viscera of the head, chest, and abdomen, are congested. There is congestion of the vessels of the brain, but extravasation does not appear to have been noticed, though the old opinion of the cause of death was in favour of apoplexy. In two cases reported by Dr. Kellie, of Leith, there was a large effusion of serum in the ventri- cles of the brain. The blood in the aorta and left cavities of the heart is stated by Dr. Paris, on the authority of Sir B. Brodie, to be -florid. It will be seen that none of these appearances are so charac- teristic as to be in themselves conclusive as to the cause of death. DEATH FROM STARVATION. Of rare Occurrence.—Symptoms.—Period required to prove Fatal.— Post-mortem Appearances.—Case of Elizabeth Canning. This is an extremely rare event ; but death from cold in persons in- sufficiently nourished is perhaps not infrequent. Cases of homicide


[209/216 b3303073x_0002_0209.jp2]

DEATH FROM STARVATION. 389 by the deprivation of food, are probably extremely rare, but insane persons, and those who seek to avoid some greater calamity, such as capital punishment, sometimes commit suicide by obstinately refusing to take sustenance. The Symptoms produced by protracted Abstinence are pain in the epi- gastrium, relieved by pressure; emaciation, the eyes and cheeks sunken, the bones projecting, the face pale and ghastly, the eyes wild and glistening, the breath hot, the mouth dry and parched, intolerable thirst, delirium, extreme prostration of strength. After a longer interval the body exhales a fetid odour, the mucous membranes of the outlets become red and inflamed, and death takes place in a fit of maniacal delirium, or in horrible convulsions. The period required to produce fatal effects varies with the age, sex, and strength, and depends in a great degree on the command of liquids, for the experiments of Redi have shown, that animals live more than twice as long when they have access to water as when they are kept without it. Cases are on record in which life has been prolonged under volun- tary starvation for a considerable period ; in one case, (that of Vi- terbi) twenty-one days, and in a still more remarkable one, fifty-eight days. This which occurred in the south of France, and was reported to the Academy of Medicine, is as follows :— Guillaume Granet was a prisoner at Toulouse, and he resorted to starvation to avoid punishment. For the first seven days the symp- toms were not very remarkable ; his face was flushed, his breath foul, and his pulse small and feeble. After this period he was compelled to drink water occasionally, to relieve the excessive thirst which he suffered, but in spite of the close watch which was kept over him, he frequently drank his urine, or the water of the prison-kennel. His strength did not appear to fail him during the greater part of the time, and, with varying symptoms of constitutional disturbance and acute sufferings, he lingered till the fifty-eighth day, when he expired, after struggling for four hours in convulsions.* If, in this case, there had been an entire abstinence from liquids the fatal event would, doubtless, have happened much sooner. Post-mortem Appearances.—The body is much emaciated, exhales a fetid odour, the eyes are red and open, the skin, mouth, and fauces dry, the stomach and intestines empty and contracted ; the gall- bladder is distended with bile ; the heart, lungs, and large vessels collapsed, and destitute of blood ; and putrefaction runs a rapid course. mode of death ; but in the absence of any disease productive of ex- treme emaciation, such a state of body will furnish a strong presump- tion of death by starvation. It must be recollected, that there are maladies such as stricture of the cesophagus, and organic disease of the ‘ * London Med. Gaz. vol. vill. p. 730. t+ Foderé, vol. i. p. 276,


[210/216 b3303073x_0002_0210.jp2]

ye) ete DEATH FROM STARVATION. be made for such causes of death. The time that a person may remain without food, or may support life on a very scanty supply of it, may become a question of some im- portance, as will appear from the following case :— : tenced to death. Elizabeth Canning,.a girl of about eighteen years of __ age, deposed on oath, that on the night of new-year’s day, 1753, she was returning to her master’s house, in Aldermanbury, when she was stopped near Bethlem-wall, Moorfields, by two men, who robbed her of her gown, apron, hat, and half-a-guinea, tied her hands behind her, and, on her struggling, swore at her, and gave her a violent blow on the temple. She was then dragged to the house of one Mother Wells, at Enfield- Wash, where she saw Mary Squires. Squires made her overtures, as Canning understood her, to become a prostitute, and, on her refusing, ripped up her stays, which she took from her, and after many threats, thrust her into a back-room, or hay-loft, where she was confined for twenty-eight days, without fire, and with no-food but some pieces of bread, amounting altogether to about a quartern loaf, about a gallon of water in a pitcher, and a small minced pie which she happened to have in her pocket. Canning further stated, that no human being had visited her during this time, and that, when her provision of bread and water was exhausted, she broke down a window-shutter which was fastened with nails, got out of the window on toa sort of pent-house, and thence jumped to the ground, nine or ten feet below. She reached home by walking as fast as her little remaining strength allowed. The case was soon known, and excited the sympathy and indignation of the public. A subscription was got up for Canning. Squires and Wells were taken into custody, tried at the Old Bailey, and Squires was senteneed to death. But Sir Crisp Gascoyne, the Lord Mayor, saw that there were many contradictory points .in Can- ning’s evidence. Her description of the loft in which she was con- fined did not exactly tally with the room in Wells’s house, a witness for the prosecution retracted her evidence, and at length, a memorial being presented to the king, the convict was respited, and ultimately pardoned. It was now Canning’s turn to be put on her trial, for it was clear, that if the old woman was innocent, Canning must be guilty. She was accordingly indicted for perjury. A physician-and an apothecary were examined as to her state of health at the time of her alleged escape from Mother Wells’s loft. They stated that she appeared like one who had suffered extreme hun- ger, thirst, and cold, but they acknowledged that a person might be as she was from other causes. After mature consideration of all the cir- cumstances of the case, the jury brought in a verdict of “ wilful and cor- rupt perjury,” and the prisoner was sentenced to transportation for seven years. In spite of the verdict and sentence, many persons still believed Canning to be innocent, the newspapers and periodicals of the Prey:


[211/216 b3303073x_0002_0211.jp2]

CASE OF ELIZABETH CANNING. 391 time were full of discussions concerning her, and Fielding wrote a pamphlet in her favour. In pursuance of the sentence, however, she - was transported to New England, where she married advantageously, _ bringing to her husband, by way of dowry, a legacy of 500/., which _ was left to her by one of her original ‘supporters. On this case, which is taken, “with occasional omissions and abbre- viations, from a very full account of the transaction by Dr. Cummin,* the author remarks, that there were many circumstances on which ~~ _ medical science might have thrown much valuable light. In the first place,—Could the girl have subsisted twenty-eight days on a quartern loaf and a gallon of water, and if so, could she have reserved sufli- cient strength to effect her escape in the manner mentioned ? To these questions we should be strongly inclined to return an answer in the negative. The cases which have been alluded to, and especially that of Guillaume Granet, give us good ground for believing, that life might have been prolonged for twenty-eight days, or even more, on this scanty supply of nourishment ; but it is extremely improbable that, at the end of this time, she would ave had strength enough left to effect her escape. This case is also-curious in its Weare on the question of identity, __ for which purpose it is quoted by Dr. Cummin. * Lectures, Medical Gazette, vol, xix.


[212/216 b3303073x_0002_0212.jp2]




[213/216 b3303073x_0002_0213.jp2]




[214/216 b3303073x_0002_0214.jp2]




[215/216 b3303073x_0002_0215.jp2]




[216/216 b3303073x_0002_0216.jp2]

| Lae for de Third Par be is coon hg e | Part-a complete : treatise on Toxiod Vb ae The ae develed to the subject - Iusinity “lately aocinee ae Nes demu some | 8 So of ‘the Plea of cell, a a Naas MERCURY, na, “COPPER, oe
