

[1/872 b22652516_0001.jp2]




[2/872 b22652516_0002.jp2]




[3/872 b22652516_0003.jp2]




[4/872 b22652516_0004.jp2]

Digitized by tine Internet Arcliive in 2015 https://arcliive.org/details/b22652516


[5/872 b22652516_0005.jp2]

A MANUAL OF MEDICAL JUKISPEUDENCE


[6/872 b22652516_0006.jp2]

By the same Author. THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE. Third Edition. Edited by Thomas Stevenson, M.D., F.R.C.P. 2 vols., 8vo, with 188 Engravings. 31s. M. POISONS, in Relation to Medical Jurisprudence and Medicine. Third Edition. Crown 8vo, with 104 Engravings. 16s.


[7/872 b22652516_0007.jp2]

A MANUAL OF MEDICAL JUEISPEUDENCE ALFEED SWAINE TAYLOK, M.D., F.E.S TWELFTH EDITION EDITED BT THOMAS STEVENSON, M.D. Lond. FELLOW OF THE ROYAL COLLECE OF PHYSICIANS OF LONDON LECTURER ON MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE AND ON CHEMISTRY AT GUY'S HOSPITAL EXASIINER IN FORENSIC MEDICINE IN THE UNIVERSITY OF LONDON EXTERNAL EXAMINER IN FORENSIC MEDICINE IN THE VICTORIA UNIVERSITY OFFICIAL ANALYST TO THE HOME OFFICE Quod hodie exemplis tuemur mox inter exempla erit J. & A. CHUECHILL 11, NEW BURLINGTON STREET 1891


[8/872 b22652516_0008.jp2]

•OVAL QOLL&C.t #f PH1W0l*)»8 CLASS •Alt - . . . -.


[9/872 b22652516_0009.jp2]

PEEFACE TO THE TWELFTH EDITION. The twelfth edition of this work has undergone an entire revision, and all references have when possible been verified. A comparison with the previous edition will show that many parts have been amended, much new matter added, and some parts entirely rewritten. T. S. Guy's Hospital, London, S.E., June, 1891.


[10/872 b22652516_0010.jp2]




[11/872 b22652516_0011.jp2]

CONTENTS. MEDICAL EVIDENCE. PAGES Chapters 1—3 ... ... ... ... ... 1—43 POISONING. Chapters 4—6 ... ... ... ... ... 44—70 IKRITANT POISONS (MINERAL). Chapters 7—14 ... ... ... ... ... 70—145 VEGETABLE AND OTHER IRRITANTS. Chapter 15 ... ... ... ... 146—164 NEUROTIC POISONS. Chapters 16—22 ... 164—233 WOUNDS AND PERSONAL INJURIES. Chapters 23—37 ... ... ... ... ... 234—388 ASPHYXIA,, DROWNING. HANGING. Chapters 38, 39 ... ... ... ... ... 389—429 STRANGULATION. SUFFOCATION. Chapters 40—42 ... ... ... ... ... 429—492 LIGHTNING. COLD. HEAT. STARVATION. Chapter 43 ... ... ... ... ... ... 492—514 PREGNANCY. Chapter 44 ... ... ... ... . ... 514—525


[12/872 b22652516_0012.jp2]

VIU CONTENTS. DELIVERY. CONCEALED BIRTH. PAGES Chapteb 45 ... ... ... ... ... 526—541 CRIMINAL ABORTION. Chapter 46 ... ... ... ... ... ... 542—562 INFANTICIDE. Chapters 47—54 ... ... ... ... ... 562—631 BIRTH. INHERITANCE. Chapter 55 ... ... ... ... ... ... 631—641 LEGITIMACY. Chapter 56 ... ... ... ... ... ... 642—660 PATERNITY. Chapter 57 ... ... ... ... ... ... 660—671 IMPOTENCY. STERILITY. Chapter 58 ... ... ... ... ... ... 671—692 RAPE. Chapters 59, 60 ... ... ... ... ... 692—723 INSANITY. Chapters 61—67 ... ... ... . ... ... 724—800 LIFE INSURANCE. Chapter 68 ... ... ... ... ... ... 801—812 'ERRATUM. Page 98, head-line, for " phosphate " read " phosphorus."


[13/872 b22652516_0013.jp2]

MEDICAL JUKISPEUDENCE. MEDICAL EVIDENCE. CHAPTER 1. THE PRACTICE OF MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE.—MEDICAL AND MEDICO-LEGAL DUTIES.—DYING DECLARATIONS.—INSPECTION OP BODIES IN DEATH FROM WOUNDS OR POISONING.—USE OP NOTES.—MEDICO-LEGAL REPORTS. Medical Jurispkudence—or, as it is sometimes called, Forensic, Legal, or State Medicine—may be defined to be tbat science which teaches the application of every branch of medical knowledge to the purposes of the law; hence its limits are, on the one hand, the require- ments of the law, and on the other, the whole range of medicine. Anatomy, physiology, medicine, surgery, chemistry, physics, and botany lend their aid as necessity arises; and in some cases all these branches of science are required to enable a court of law to arrive at a proper conclusion on a contested question affecting life or property. The purpose of this work is to bring as far as possible within a small compass those subjects that especially demand inquiry, and which more particularly concern the duties of the educated physician and surgeon. The definition al)ove given necessarily implies that a medical jurist should have a theoretical and practical knowledge of all branches of the profession, a large range of - experience, and the rare power of adapting his knowledge and experience to emergencies. He should be able to elucidate any diflBcult medico-legal question that may arise, and be prepared at all times to make a cautious selection of such medical facts, and a proper application of such medical principles, as may be necessary to enable a judge to place the subject in an intelli- gible hght before a jury, and to enable a jury to arrive at a just conclusion. The variety of subjects of which a medical jurist is required to have a knowledge, may well alarm a student and lead him to suppose that, as he cannot make himself perfectly acquainted with all, he may well forego the labour of preparing himself in any. But this would be B


[14/872 b22652516_0014.jp2]

2 DUTIES OF PHYSICIANS AND taking an erroneous view of bis position. This description of the quahfications necessary to constitute a normal witness in a court of law must not deter him from entering on the study. It is assuredly beyond the mental power of any individual that he should be at the same time profoundly versed in all the principles of medicine and jurisprudence, and that he should be able to answer all possible ques- tions, and encounter and remove all medical difficulties, that may occur during the trial of a civil or criminal case. All that the law expects from a medical man is a fair average knowledge, not merely of his profession, but of that which falls more peculiarly under the province of a medical witness. There can be no doubt that the more perfectly a man has made himself master of his profession, the better will he be fitted to follow the principles and apply himself to the practice of medical jurisprudence; but he must divest himself of the notion that these principles can be spontaneously acquired, or that they are neces- sarily derived from the study of those isolated branches of medicine upon which medical jurisprudence is based. The materials for the medical jurist undoubtedly exist in these collateral sciences; but they require to be assorted, selected, and moulded into shape, before they can be applied to any useful or practical purpose. The duties of a medical jurist are distinct from those of a mere physician or surgeon. The latter looks only to the treatment of disease or accident, and the saving of hfe; but the object of the former, in a large proportion of cases, is, whether in reference to the living or dead, to aid the law in fixing on the perpetrator of a crime, or to rescue an innocent person from a falsely imputed crime. Thus he may be required to determine whether, in a particular case, the cause of death was natural or violent; and for this purpose it will be necessary for him to make an entirely new application of his professional knowledge. He has now the difficult task of making a selection from those parts of the medical sciences which bear upon the legal proof of crime. Some members of the profession have been inclined to look upon medico-legal practice as an unnecessary addition to their ordinary duties; but there are few that have been long engaged in medical practice, who have not found themselves occasionally placed in situa- tions of difficulty from the occurrence of cases demanding medico-legal investigation. A medical man is summoned to attend a person labouring under the effects of poison criminally administered; but at the time he may have no knowledge, or even suspicion, that poison is the cause of the symptoms. In spite of the best treatment, death ensues : here the functions of the medical man end, and those of a medical witness begin. It is impossible that he can now avoid giving evidence, or shift the responsibility on another—the law will insist on his appearance, first in the court of the coroner, next before the magistrates, and after- wards at the assizes. It will here be assumed that, as a registered member of the profession, he is fully competent to answer every question put to him by judge and counsel relative to the general efiects of poisons; the quantity required to destroy life; and the time within which a poison may prove fatal. It may be objected to his evidence,


[15/872 b22652516_0015.jp2]

SURGEONS IN ACTING AS WITNESSES. 3 that the deceased had died from the effects of disease, and not from poison; in which case the cross-examination will lead to a searching inquiry into all those diseases which resemble the effects of poison in their symptoms and post-mortem appearances, as well as the means ot making an unfailing distinction between them, and the fallacies to which the chemical processes for the detection of poison are hable. On another occasion a medical man may be called to render assistance to one stabbed in a quarrel, and speedily dying from the wound. The office of the surgeon here ceases, while that of the medical jurist begins. He must now be prepared to answer numerous questions, all bearing upon the legal proof of crime, all necessary in law, although apparently superfluous in surgery. Thus he may be asked to state the precise characters of a wound inflicted upon the body of a man soon after death; and by what means a particular wound was inflicted. Was it homicidal or accidental? The amount of blood lost? Whether the person could have moved or performed any act after receiving the wound? Are certain spots found upon his clothes, or upon a knife belonging to him, due to effused blood or to other causes ? Whether any, and what statements were made by the dying man, and what were the precise circumstances under which they were made ? It need hardly be observed that questions of this nature are rarely noticed, except in a cursory manner, by chemists and surgeons; and a medical man is not likely to acquire the means of answering them by intuition. On the other hand, regarding ourselves as living in a civihzed state, in which the detection and punishment of crimes against life and property are indispensable to the security of all, it is impossible to overrate their importance. Unless a witness is able to return answers to these ques- tions when a public necessity occurs, a guilty man may escape punish- ment, or an innocent man may be condemned. A witness may thus most seriously injure his own reputation ; for it is certain that his qualifications as a physician, surgeon, or general practitioner, however great, will not shield him from general reprobation. Thus, then, it is obvious that the duties of a medical jurist are of a highly responsible nature and of great importance to society, while the cases which call them into exercise are of purely accidental occurrence. A medical practitioner who thinks himself secure in the most retired corner of the kingdom, is liable to find himself suddenly summoned as a witness on a trial, to answer questions which perhaps during a long period of practice he had been led to regard as unimportant. Under the circumstances it is scarcely possible that he can avoid exposing his deficiencies, and the final question will be. Have you ever attended to or thought of these subjects before f A negative answer to this question, while it commonly brings with it public censure, will in most instances lead to the acquittal of the accused in spite of strong presumptions of guilt. The truth of this picture will be felt and acknowledged by those who have been a few years engaged in practice. The records of our courts of law contain many unfortunate exposures, which might have been easily avoided had the witnesses only availed themselves of the oppor-


[16/872 b22652516_0016.jp2]

4 MEDICAL CONTRASTED WITH tunities afforded to them while students of acquiring a knowledge of the subject; but they had unreflectingly acted on the principle, that medical jurisprudence was a dry, dull, and useless study, and that the practice of it was remote and speculative. This feeling is, however, fast disappearing. Those who have been compelled by circumstances to give their attention to it, have, in subsequent cases, taken care to prepare themselves for the ordeal through which every medical witness must pass. Some medical men who have treated legal medicine with indifference have ventured to act as witnesses, thinking that the subjects on which they were likely to be examined were so little known to judge and counsel that even hazardous or rash statements would escape observa- tion : such witnesses, however, have often found to their cost that they were labouring under a delusion. Various circumstances have led to the acquisition of much medico-legal knowledge by lawyers, especially in relation to questions connected with wounds, child-murder, and poisoning; and they are not slow in detecting and exposing a mere pretender who attempts to shelter himself by vague or evasive state- ments and technical language. Another fact must be borne in mind:— there are few counsel engaged in any civil or criminal case of importance who do not take care to fortify themselves, under medical advice, with a full knowledge of the views of standard medical writers on the subject in dispute; and with these works before them, and with their pro- verbial acuteness, he must indeed be a clever witness who can succeed in passing off an erroneous or evasive answer to a medico-legal question. It is a frequent charge against members of the medical profession that they are the worst witnesses on matters of fact and opinion. This is an unmerited censure. Those who are ready to make this charge overlook the number, complexity and difficulty of the questions that are put to medical men compared with those put to other witnesses. They also forget that medical men are much more frequently summoned as witnesses than the members of the two other learned professions. Their evidence obtains mueh greater publicity, and is necessarily exposed to a wider circle of criticism. The fact is, that good and bad witnesses are to be met with in every profession, and under equal con- ditions there is no reason to suppose that one would furnish a greater number of incompetent witnesses than another. It is certainly the fault of medical men that they are not always prepared for the ques- tions which are likely to arise in a case on which they know they will be required to give evid^ce. This want of preparation frequently applies to facts as well as to opinions. Thus, in reference to a case on which a charge of murder or manslaughter may be ultimately founded, a medical man who is called in omits to observe many .circumstances, because at the time they appear to him to have little importance, although at the subsequent trial he may find, to his dismay, that they actually become the turning pdnts of innocence or guilt. Medical observation as a result of professional habits is, on these occasions, in general confined to only one set of circumstances—the recognition and ifcr^atment of accident or disease; but medico-legal


[17/872 b22652516_0017.jp2]

MEDICO-LEGAL OBSERVATION. 5 observation should take a much wider range than this, and should be directed to all the surrounding facts and incidents of a case. The essential difference in the two kinds of practice is, that circumstances which are of no interest in a medical or surgical point of view, are often of the greatest value and importance in legal medicine. It is obvious that if they are not observed by a medical witness when he is first summoned to the injured person, whether dying or dead, it will be out of his power to meet many of the questions which must arise in the progress of the case. The non-observance of these facts is a serious evil, and often carries with it, although unjustly, an imputation of professional ignorance. The first duty, therefore, of a medical jurist is to cultivate a faculty of minute observation of medical and moral circumstances. This, combined with a general knowledge of what the law requires as evidence, will enable him to meet satisfactorily the scientific questions that may be necessary for the elucidation of a case. The exercise of this faculty is by no means inconsistent with the performance of his duties as a surgeon. A learned judge on one occasion remarked that * a medical man, when he sees a dead body, should nxitice everything.'' Undoubtedly he should observe everything which could throw a light upon the production of wounds or other injuries found upon it. It should not be left to policemen to say whether there were any marks of blood on the dress or on the hands of the deceased, or on the furni- ture in the room. The dress of the deceased, as well as the body, should be always closely examined on the spot by the medical man. It may stimulate the attention of a medical practitioner in reference to these inquiries if he is informed that one art of counsel defending persons charged with murder or manslaughter consists in endeavouring to discover what the witness omitted to do. Although sometimes the omission may be really of no medical importance whatever, yet it is usually placed before the jury in such a strong light that the accused obtains the benefit of a doubt. The omission may be attributed to pro- fessional ignorance, or, what is worse, to bias—a determination to find proofs of guilt—when the facts might be innocently explained by a want of experience on the part of the witness in dealing with cases of this nature. If we except medical experts, who are selected according to their experience in different branches of the profession, medical men have no option respecting medico-legal practice; for the cases which give rise to medico-legal questions are always more or less connected with the practice of medicine and surgery. Thus before any inquiry is instituted by a magistrate or coroner, and before any suspicious cir- cumstances have come to light, a medical man may be summoned to a person dying from the efiects of a wound, or from the secret admini- stration of poison. The dying person may make to him a declaration or statement as to the circumstances under which the wound was inflicted or the poison administered: he may also mention the names of the person or persons concerned in the assault or the administration. This dying declaration or statement, according to the circumstances


[18/872 b22652516_0018.jp2]

6 DYING DECLARATIONS. under which it was made, may become of material importance in the prosecution of a party charged with murder or manslaughter. It is therefore proper that a practitioner should observe and make notes of the exact condition of the patient;—whether, when he makes the state- ment, he is under the conviction or belief that he is about to die. It has been thought that it was also necessary to prove that the wounded man had lost all hope of recovery: but as a judge has justly remarked, it is very diflScult, if not impossible, to say on these occasions, when, if ever, the feeling of hope completely deserts a man. Again, a man may express, an opinion that he shall " not recover," but this is not sufiScient. The law admits these declarations, not because recovery is impossible, but because the person making the statement has in his mind at the time of making it a full comaction of approaching death. It is there- fore the duty of the medical attendant on these occasions, to see how far the person making the statement believes that his death is impending or nearly approaching. This belief is considered in law to be equivalent to the obligation of an oath. Hence, when the case is likely to prove fatal, the medical man should warn the patient, in the presence of his relatives or friends, of his dangerous condition. If the wound or poison is not likely to prove rapidly fatal, the attendance of a magistrate to take down the state- ment in due legal form would relieve the medical man of all responsi- bility. Should any statement, however, be made to him under these circumstances, it is his duty to make, on the spot, a note of the words actually used. There should be no paraphrase or translation of them, but they should be the very words of the dying man. It is not for the witness, but for the court, to interpret what is thus stated. A medical man on these occasions should not render himself officious in extracting information. He may receive that which is voluntarily uttered, and, either immediately or on the earliest possible opportunity, write down the statement as it was made. Any question should be simply confined to the purpose of explaining what may appear to be ambiguous or contradictory in the declaration itself. In reference to persons who have died from the effects of wounds, poison, or other violent causes, the initiatory proceedings connected with the inquiry usually take place in the court of the coroner; and unless the medical man in attendance is supposed to be implicated, by maltreatment or otherwise, in the death of the person, the duty of making an examination of the dead body devolves upon him. He may not have seen the person while living; and in this case it will be necessary that he should give his attention to those circumstances which may be of importance in the future inquiry. He should note as far as it can be ascertained:—1. The exact time of death, if known, and thus determine how long a period the person survived. 2. The attitude, position, and condition of the body. 3. The state of the dress. 4. All surrounding objects. Any bottles, paper-packets, weapons, or spilled liquids lying about should be collected and preserved, and their position with regard to the body of the deceased should be noted. 5. Any vomited matters near the deceased should be collected.-^Iri


[19/872 b22652516_0019.jp2]

RULES FOR OBSERVING ALLEGED CASES OF HOMICIDE. 7 making a post-mortem examination of fhe body tlie following additional points should be attended to. 6. The external appearance of the body, and whether the surface is livid or pallid. 7. The state of the counte- nance. 8. All marks of violence on the person, discomposure of the dress, marks of blood, etc. 9. The situation, form, and direction of all wounds. 10. The presence or absence of warmth in the legs, arms, abdomen, mouth, or armpits. 11. The presence of cadaveric rigidity in any part of the body. To give any value to the two last-mentioned' characters, it is necessary for the practitioner to observe the nature of the floor on which the body is lying,—whether the body is clothed or naked, young or old, fat or emaciated. These conditions create a difference, in respect to the cooling of the body and the access of rigidity. 12. If found dead—when was the deceased last seen living, or known to have been alive? 13. All circumstances leading to a- suspicion of suicide or murder. 14. The time after death at which the' inspection was made. 15. The state of the abdominal viscera. If the stomach and intestines are found inflamed, the seat of inflammation should be exactly specified; also all marks of softening, ulceration, effusion of blood, corrosion, or perforation. The stomach should be removed and placed in a separate vessel, a ligature being applied to each end. If cut open for examination at this period, this operation should be performed in a clean dish, and with such care that none of the contents are lost or are allowed to mix with the contents of the intestines. 16. The contents of the stomach, if this organ was opened during the inspection, should be collected in a clean graduated vessel:—notice a, the quantity; the odour tried by several persons ; c, the colour; d, acid or alkaline reaction; e, presence of blood, mucus, or bile; /, presence of undigested food; and it may be as well to observe, that the presence of farinaceous matters (as bread) would be indicated by the addition of iodine water, if the contents were not alkaline—of fat, by warming; other special characters. 17. The contents of the duodenum should be separately collected, ligatures being applied to it. 18. The state of the large intestines, especially the rectum, and the condition of their contents. The discovery of hardened faeces in the rectum would prove that purging had not existed shortly before death. 19. The state of the windpipe, throat, and guUet, and whether there are in these parts any foreign substances, or marks of inflamma- tion and corrosion. This is of essential importance, as it throws a light upon a variety of questions which may arise respecting death by suffoca- tion from mechanical causes, or the nature of a substance swallowed. 20. The state of the lungs and heart; morbid changes, etc. 21. The state of the brain and spinal marrow. 22. The condition of the womb, ovaries, and genital organs, as in the female poison has been sometimes introduced into the body by the vagina, or wounds have been inflicted internally. 23. The kidneys and the spleen should be submitted to examination. 24. The liver with the gall bladder should be removed for chemical examination. 25. The urinary bladder, with any fluid contained in it, should be removed and placed in a separate jar. Such are the points to which, in the greater number of cases of violent


[20/872 b22652516_0020.jp2]

INSPECTION OF BODIES. EXHUMATIONS. 8 death, a medical jurist should give his attention. By means of these data, noted according to the particular case to which they are adapted, he will in general be enabled, without difficulty, to determine the probable time of death, and the actual means by which death was brought about. He may thereby have it in his power, if the case be one of poisoning, to point out the dish or article of food which had contained the poison, and to throw light upon any disputed question of suicide or murder in relation to the deceased. Many cases of death from wounds or poison are rendered obscure, owing to these points not having been attended to in the first instance. It is not necessary in this place to enter into any details respecting the mode of performing an inspection. A medical practitioner is supposed to have acquired a knowledge of this part of his duties during his study of anatomy; and any additional information which may be required will be found in the appropriate sections of this work. The only essential points, in addition to those above mentioned, are, 1. To examine all the important organs for marks of natural disease: and 2. To note down any unusual pathological appearances or abnormal deviations; although they may at the time appear to have no bearing on the cause of death. It is useful to bear in mind on these occasions that the body is inspected, not merely to show that a person has died from poison, but to prove that he has not died from Siny natural cause. Medical practitioners commonly give their attention exclusively to the first point; while lawyers, defending accused parties, very properly direct a most searching examination to the last-mentioned point, i.e. the healthy or unhealthy state of those organs which are essential to life. The usual causes of sudden death have their seats commonly in the brain, the heart and its great vessels, or in the lungs. Marks of effusion of blood, congestion, inflammation, suppuration, or a diseased condition of the valves of the heart, should be sought for and accurately noted. ;It has also been recommended that an examination of the spinal marrow should be made. If the cause of death is obscure after the general examination of the body, there is good reason for inspecting the condition of this organ. Exhumation of Bodies.—Sometimes the inspection of a body is required to be made long after interment. So long as the cofiin remains entire, there may be the expectation of discovering certain kinds of mineral poison in the organs; but decomposition may have advanced so far as to destroy all pathological evidence. The inspec- tion in such cases is commonly confined to the abdominal viscera. The stomach is often found so thin and collapsed that the anterior and posterior walls appear to form only one coat. This organ should be removed, with the duodenum, and ligatures should be applied to each. The liver and the spleen should also be removed, in order that, if necessary, they may be separately analysed. If poison is not found in one of these parts, it is not likely that it will be discovered in other parts of the body. It has been recommended that a portion of earth immediately above and below the cofiin should be removed for analysis, as it may contain arsenic ; but this appears to be an unnecessary piece


[21/872 b22652516_0021.jp2]

9 IDENTITY OF SUBSTANCES. of refinement when the coffin is entire, or when the abdominal parietes still cover the viscera. If decomposition has so far advanced as to have led to an admixture of earth with the viscera, and the poison is found in minute quantity in the tissues only, the source of the poison may be regarded as doubtful; and in this case the earth in which the remains are found should undergo a chemical examination. The body of a deceased person, when exhumed, should be identified by some friend or relative in the presence of the medical examiner. In a case of murder by poison, the evidence almost failed, owing to this precaution not having'been taken. It is important that the viscera taken;from a body which has been long in the grave should be sealed up immediately. They should not be allowed * to come in contact with any metal, nor with any surface except that of clean glass, porcelain, or wood. It has been recom- mended that they should be washed with chlorinated lime or carbolic acid; but this is decidedly improper; the use of any preservative chemical liquid would not only embarrass the future analysis, but would render a special examination of . an unused portion of the liquid necessary, the purity of which would have to be unequivocally estab- lished. Preservation from air in clean glass vessels, with well-fitted corks covered with gutta-percha tissue, is aU that is required in practice. Identity of Substances.—It is necessary to observe that all legal authorities rigorously insist upon proof being adduced of the identity of the vomited matters and substances taken from the body of a deceased person, when, poisoning is suspected. Supposing that, during the examination, the stomach and viscera are removed from the body, they should never be placed on any surface or in any vessel until it has been first ascertained that ithe surface or vessel is perfectly clean. If this point be not attended to, it will be in the power of counsel for the defence to raise a doubt in the minds of the jury, whether the poisonous substance found might not have been accidentally present in the vessel used. This may be regarded as a very remote presump- tion ; but, nevertheless, it is upon technical objections of this kind that acquittals follow in spite of the strongest presumptions of guilt. This is a question for which every medical witness should be prepared, whether he is giving his evidence at a coroner's inquest or in a court of law. Many might feel disposed to regard matters of this kind as involving unnecessary nicety and care; but if they are neglected it is possible that a trial may be at once stopped, so that the care bestowed upon a chemical analysis will be dabour thrown away. Evidence of the presence of poison in the contents of a stomach was once rejected at a trial for murder, because they had been hastily thrown into a jar borrowed from a neighbouring grocer's shop, and it could not be satisfactorily proved that the jar was clean and entirely free from traces of poison (in which the grocer dealt) when used for this purpose. When the life of a human being is at stake, as in a charge of murder by poisoning, the slightest doubt is always very properly interpreted in favour of the accused.


[22/872 b22652516_0022.jp2]

lO PRESERVATION OF ARTICLES FOR ANALYSIS. Not only must clean vessels be used for receiving any article des- tined for subsequent analysis, but care must be taken that the identity of a substance is preserved, or the most correct analysis, afterwards made, will be inadmissible as evidence. The suspected substance, when once placed in the hands of a medical man, should never be let out of his sight or custody. It should be kept sealed under his private seal, and locked up, while in his possession, in a closet to which no other person has a key. If he has once let the article out of his hands, and allowed it to pass through the hands of several other persons, then he complicates the evidence for the prosecution, by rendering it indispensable for these persons to state under what circum- stances it was placed while in their possession. The exposure of a suspected substance on a table or in a closet or room to which many have access, may be fatal to its identity; for the chemical evidence, so important in a criminal investigation, will probably be altogether rejected by the court. When any article {e.g. a stomach) is reserved for analysis, care should be taken to at once attach immovably to it, or to the vessel containing it, a label, upon which is plainly written the. name of the deceased and the date of removal. This is especially necessary when there are two or more articles for analysis. The greatest inconvenience has resulted from the neglect of this simple precaution. Presermig articles for Analysis.—In removing viscera or liquids from the body and reserving them for analysis, it is necessary to observe certain precautions. A clean vessel with a wide mouth should be selected; it should be only sufficiently large to hold the organ or liquid (the less air remaining in it the better); and it should be secured by a closely fitting cork, covered with gutta-percha tissue or bladder. Another piece of sheet caoutchouc or gutta-percha should then be tied over the mouth. In this way any loss by evaporation or decomposition is prevented, and the viscera may be preserved in a cool place for some time. If the mouth of the vessel be .too wide for a cork, the other articles cannot be dispensed with. Paper only should not be used, as the appearances after death in the viscera may be entirely destroyed by the evaporation which takes place through the layers of paper with which the vessel containing them is covered. The prac- titioner should bear in mind that all these matters are likely to come out in evidence. For reasons already stated, antiseptic chemical com- pounds should not be used. The articles used for the preservation of viscera should be in all cases scrupulously examined. Some kinds of calico are dressed with arsenic and starch paste, and many kinds of wrapping-paper as well as wall-papers are strongly impregnated with this poison. One observa- tion shows that this is not an unnecessary caution. A medical man was engaged in examining the body of a child, in order to determine the cause of death. The organs were healthy, and as no sutlicient cause presented itself, he removed the stomach with a view of making an analj^sis of its contents. He was suddenly called away; and, to preserve the stomach, he wrapped it iu a piece of paper (used for


[23/872 b22652516_0023.jp2]

II USE OF NOTES. papering rooms), placing it on the uncoloured side, and he locked it in a closet until the following day. Assisted by a friend, he then analysed the contents, and found a trace of morphine with a pretty large quantity of arsenic. As the sj^mptoms from which the child had died were not those of poisoning with arsenic, and there were no appearances of the action of this substance on the body, he came to the conclusion that its presence must have been owing to some extraneous cause. He examined a portion of the wall-paper in which the stomach had been wrapped, and then found that that part of it which was coloured yellow was tinted with sulphide of arsenic, or orpiment. It was therefore evident, as commercial orpiment contains white arsenic, that the stomach and its contents had imbibed a portion of the poison during the night. ('Lancet,^ 1855, i. p. 632.) This satisfactorily accounted for the presence of arsenic, under circumstances which might have given rise to a false charge of murder. Many wall- papers contain arsenic, aAd this arsenic spreads by imbibition to other parts of the paper not so tinted. It would, of course, be proper to avoid in all cases the use of any wrapper having upon it mineral colours of any description. The above case shows in a striking point of view the danger of trusting to chemical analysis alone. Unless we look to physiology and pathology, an erroneous opinion may be expressed. The products of an analiysis, in the shape of sublimates or precipi- tates, should be preserved as evidence, distinctly labelled in small glass-tubes hermetically sealed. They can then, if asked for, be pro- duced for examination at the inquest or trial. On the use of Notes.—As a rule in medico-legal investigations, a medical practitioner should make' notes of what he observes in regard to symptoms, appearances after death, and the results of analysis. His own observations should be kept distinct from information given to him by others. He may base his conclusions on the former, but not on the latter until given in evidence. From the common forms of law in this country, a person charged with a crime may remain imprisoned, if at a distance from the metropolis, for some months before he is brought to trial. It is obviouSj however clear the circum- stances may at the time appear to a practitioner, that it will require more than ordinary powers of memory to retain, for so long a period, a distinct recollection of all the facts of the case. If he is unprovided with notes, and his memory is defective, then the case will turn in favour of the prisoner, who will be the person to benefit by the neglect of the witness. In adopting the plan here recommended, such a result may be easily prevented. It may be remarked that the law relative to the admissibihty of notes or memoranda in evidence is very strict; and in trials for murder is rigorously enforced by the judges. In order to render such notes or memoranda admissible, it is indispensably necessary that they should have been taken on the spot at the time the observations were made, or as soon afterwards as practicable; and, further, it must be remembered that a witness can refer to them only for the purpose of refreshing his memory. If from


[24/872 b22652516_0024.jp2]

MEDICO-LEGAL REPORTS. 12 indistinctness of writing or other causes a copy of the notes has been subsequently made, a witness should not destroy the original notes, but have them ready for production. He must also be prepared to give a reasonable explanation of any alterations or interlineations which may appear in his original notes. So in reference to all other written memoranda connected with the case as, for example, the medi- cines prescribed for the deceased, the visits made to him, etc., the witness should be prepared to produce them and explain any remarks which may be found in his books. Counsel are entitled to look at and examine all documents of this kind which are produced or used by the witness in giving his evidence in the superior courts. Medicolegal Reports.—One of the duties of a medical jurist is to draw up a report of the results of his examination : 1, in regard to S3'^mptoms; 2, in regard to appearances after death; and 3, in regard to the results of an analysis. With respect to the first two divisions of the report, the reader is referred to the rules for investigating cases of poisoning (pp. 6, 7, 8). It need hardly be observed that the time at which the person was first seen, and the circumstances under which the attendance of the practitioner was first required, as well as the time of death, should be particularly stated. The hour, the day of the week, and ihe month, should be invariably mentioned. Some medical witnesses merely state the day of the week, without that of the month, or vice versa. At a trial this sometimes creates great confusion, by rendering a reference to an almanac necessary. The words yesterday, next 'day, etc., should never be used. The facts which it will be necessary to enter in the report are specially stated under the heads of investigation (see pp. 6, 7). If these facts are not observed in the order -there set down, their value as evidence of the cause of death, or of the criminality or innocence of particular persons, will be lost. In drawing up a report of symptoms and. appearances after death, the facts should be first plainly and concisely stated seriatim, in language easily intelligible to non-professional men. A reporter is not called upon to display his erudition, but to make himself understood. If technical terms are employed, their meaning should also be stated. When a subject is thoroughly understood, there can be no difficulty in rendering it in simple language; and when it is not well understood, the practitioner is not in a position to make any report. Magistrates, coroners, and barristers easily detect ignorance, even when it appears under the mask , of erudition. In recording.facts the reporter should not encumber his statements with opinions, inferences, or comments. The facts should be first stated and the conclusion should be reserved until the end of the report. The language in which conclusions are expressed, should be precise and clear. It,must be remembered that these are intended to form a concise summary of the whole report, upon which the judgment of a magistrate, or the decision of a coroner's jury, will be ultimately based. They should be most strictly confined to the matters which are the subject of inquiry, and which have actually fallen under the


[25/872 b22652516_0025.jp2]

MEDICO-LEGAL REPORTS. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 13 observation of the witness. Thus, they commonly refer to the follow- ing questions:—What was the cause of death ? What are the medical circumstances which lead you to suppose that death was caused by violence? What are the circumstances which lead you to suppose that death was not caused by natural disease ? Answers to one or all of these questions comprise, in > general, all that the reporter is required to introduce into the conclusions-of his report. The reporter should remember that his conclusions are to be based only upon medical facts,—not upon moral circumstances, unless he is specially required to express his opinion with regard to them. Further, they must be founded only on what he has himself seen or observed. Any information derived from others, should not be made the basis of an opinion, either in evidence or in a medico-legal report. It is scarcely necessary to remark that a conclusion based upon mere probabilities is of no value as evidence. In drawing up a report on the resuU»< of a chemical analysis, the following points should be borne in mind. A liquid or solid!is received for analysis. 1. When, from whom, and how received? 2. In what state was it received—secured in any way, or exposed?- 3. If more than one substance received, was each separately and distinctly labelled? The appearance of the vessel, its capacity, and the quantity of liquid (by measure) or solid, (by weight) contained therein, noted. 4. Physical characters of the substance. 6. As to processes and tests employed for determining whether it contained poison. These processes need not be described;—a general outhne of the analysis will suffice. 6* Sup- posing the substance to contain poison—was this in a pure state or mixed with some other substance ? 7,. The strength of the poison, if an acid, or if it be in solution : in all cases, the quantity of poison found. 8. Supposing no poison to be contained in it, what was the nature of the substance ? Did it contain anything of a noxious nature, iiC. hkely to injure health or destroy life ? 9; Could the supposed poisonous substance exist naturally or be produced within the body ? 10. Was it present in any of the hquids or solids employed in the chemical analysis?. 11. Was it contained in any of the articles of food or medicine taken by the deceased? 12. Is its presence to be ascribed to the use of any mineral matter employed by injection after death for the preservation of the body of the deceased ? 13. What quantity of poison was actually separated in the free or absorbed state ? 14. How much of the substance found would, under the circumstances, be likely to destroy life? There are few reports in which answers to some of these questions, although not formally put, will not be required; and unless they are borne in mind by the operator at the time an analysis is undertaken, those which are omitted can never receive an answer, however important to the ends of justice that answer may ultimately become. There are frequently defects in these reports which it is desirable to point out. The statements are sometimes drawn up in exaggerated language ; at others they are overloaded with technical, and therefore unintelligible terms, and the writer is not careful enough to keep his


[26/872 b22652516_0026.jp2]

MEDICO-LEGAL KEPORTS. TECHNICAL TERMS. 14 facts distinct from his comments. The former may be useful as evidence; the latter are inadmissible. With respect to the first of these defects, it is too much the practice of medical men, in drawing up reports of medical cases for professional purposes, to use exaggerated language. Thus it may be observed in the description of an ordinary post-mortem examination, the lining membrane of the stomach is described as being ' intensely' inflamed, or some part is ' considerably' injected, or a cavity is ' enormously' distended. Expressions thus loosely employed, convey to the legal mind a widely different meaning Irom that intended by the reporter. They create also, if withdrawn or modified, great difiiculty in evidence, and at the same time they place the witness in an undesirable position before the court. On the other hand, if retained, they may render the facts insusceptible of explana- tion upon any theory of natural disease. Such descriptions obviously imply a comparison with similar conditions in numerous other dead bodies; but what is the standard by which they are really measured, and what opportunity has the witness had of creating such a standard from his own experience ? In general it will be found that such ex- pressions have been used, without proper consideration, from a habit acquired by the writer in reporting cases for the information of medical men only. Let him who is inclined to use them, bear in mind that barristers look much more closely to the strict meaning of words than medical men, and that they are always disposed to distrust the judg- ment of one who cannot speak or write without resorting to the use of the superlative degree. The free use of technical terms in drawing up reports may be attri- buted to a similar practice in the profession. Putting aside those cases in which a medical man believes that he is displaying his erudition by the selection and use of such terms, there can be no doubt that the greater number of medical practitioners fall into this practice from mere habit. They write as if they were addressing the report to scane medical society, instead of a coroner and jury who have never in their reading or experience met with such terms, and to whom therefore they are unintelligible. In a report, which was submitted to the author for explanation, on the appearances in the body of a man who had suffered from chronic insanity, the following passage occurred:—' The only morbid appearance in the brain was an atheromatous deposit in the Pons Varolii, near the situation of the locus niger.' In another document the reporter stated, for the information of a coroner's jury, that the ' integuments of the cranium were reflected, and the calvarium was exposed.' If a reporter will use such terms as these or others of a simflar kind, such as ' parietes of the abdomen,' ' epigastrium,' ' hyper- trophy of the liver,' when it would require no more trouble to put what he means in plain English, he must be prepared to have his meaning perverted or wholly misunderstood. Setting aside the jurors, it may be observed that educated persons, such as coroners and magistrates, do not commonly include professional terms within the range of their studies. There are but few of them who understand the difference between perineum and peritoneum, or the meaning of the words hemi-


[27/872 b22652516_0027.jp2]

15 MEDICO-LEGAL EEPOETS. spheres of the brain, pia mater, puncta eruenta, corpora quadrigemina, centrum ovale, etc. They are not likely to know the difference between the cardia and pylorus, nor the nature or situation of the duodenum, jejunum, ileum, or csecum, and are as ready to consider them to be parts of the liver or urinary bladder as of the intestines. On one occasion, a judge asked for an explanation of the meaning of the term ' alimentary canal;' on another he was entirely ignorant as to the meaning of 'verdigris.' A slight consideration will show to any medical practitioner, that refined professional language is wholly mis- placed in a report which is intended to inform and convince the minds of ordinary men upon plain matters of fact. The last point which calls for comment in reference to medical reports, is the loose manner in which facts, comments on facts, and hearsay statements are sometimes found blended. If a reporter takes care to separate facts from comment, his report is admissible, and may be read at the inquest or trial as evidence. The facts are for the jury —the comments upon the facts, introduced by the reporter, may or may not be correct. Their correctness or relevancy to the case will be elicited in the cross-examination. As a rule, nothing should be entered in a report which is not connected with the subject of inquiry, nor except it has actually fallen under the observation of the reporter. The introduction of statements made by others, or of circumstances which have come to his knowledge through public rumour, should be carefully avoided. Upon the medical report, and such evidence as may be required to explain it, an accused person may be committed, either by a coroner or magistrate, for trial at the Assizes. In the first stage of the proceed- ings, under these circumstances, the medical witness goes before the grand jury, and there, after the administration of an oath, he is required to make a general statement of what he knows of the matter. Such questions are put as may be necessary to elucidate the cause of death ; and on the finding of a true bill, the accused is placed upon his trial before one of the judges of assize. According to the variable circum- stances attending such cases, the medical evidence is called for at an early or late stage of the proceedings. When it is at all doubtful whether the cause of death was owing to any criminal act, it is called for at the commencement of the case in order to lay a foundation for further inquiry. It is necessary that a medical witness should remember that copies of his report and depositions, either before a coroner or magistrate, are usually placed in the hands of counsel as well as of the judge, and that his evidence, as it is given at the trial, is compared word for word with that which has already been put on record. There is reason to believe that this is not generally known to members of the medical profession, and thus it happens that either from failure of memory, want of accurate observation, or carelessness in giving evidence, medical witnesses have laid themselves open to severe censure, either by stating matters differently at the trial, or by giving a different complexion to the facts. Any serious deviations from what is on record will of course tell


[28/872 b22652516_0028.jp2]

16 coroners' inquests. unfavourably for the witness, supply arnpl^ materials for a severe cross- examination, and form an excellent ground of defence for the prisoner. The witness's weakness is the prisoner's opportunity, and of course counsel for the defence will not lose the occasion of impressing upon the jury that a man who can on oath give two different^ accounts of the same transaction,' is not to be believed on either. CHAPTEK 2. coroners' inquests.—ASSIZES.—SUBPCENAS.—MEDICAL FEES.—DUTIES OF MEDICAL WITNESSES.—MEDICAL SECRETS.—QUOTATIONS FROM BOOKS.— PRESENCE IN COURT.—TECHNICAL TERMS.—LICENSE OF COUNSEL.—RULES FOR THE DELIVERY OF EVIDENCE. Coromrs' Inquests.—The proceedings at coroners' inquests are treated too lightly by medical men. The ignorant and uneducated class of persons who often constitute the jury, as well as the circumstances under which the inquiry usually takes place, are not calculated to inspire great respect for these initiatory proceedings; but still by law and custom coroners' inquisitions are, and have been for ages in this country, the only tribunals for inquiring into and determining the cause of death in cases of suspected violence ; and they are therefore deserving of more attention than is usually shown to them by medical witnesses. As a rule, in all inquests which are likely to end in a committal of the accused person, a medical man who is giving his evidence before a coroner in the room of a small country inn or in a village school-room, is virtually delivering it before a judge of assize ; and this fact alone, if not a respect for the court, should induce him to give his evidence guardedly, and'with a due consideration to the serious results to which it may ultimately lead.. The Coroners Act, 1887 (50 and' 5L Vict. c. 71, s. 1), directs that 'where a coroner is informed that the dead body of a person is lying within his jurisdiction, and there is reasonable cause to suspect that such person has died either a violent or an unnatural death, or has died a sudden death of which the cause is unknown, or that such person has died in prison, or in such place or under such circumstances as to require an inquest in pursuance of any Act, the coroner, whether the cause of death arose within his jurisdiction or not, shall, as soon as practicable, issue his warrant' for an inquest; and the Lunacy Act, 1890 (53 Vict. c. 5, s. 84), directs that ' every coroner shall upon receiving notice of the death of a lunatic within his district, if he considers that any reason- able suspicion attends the cause and circumstances of the death, summon a jury to inquire into the same.' The information upon which a coroner generally acts is—1. Notice from a beadle, or other officer of the parish (whose zeal is sometimes stimulated by a fee or salary),


[29/872 b22652516_0029.jp2]

OFFICE OF CORONER. of any death from sudden or supposed unusual causes. 2. Notice from a medical man who may have attended the deceased, and who communicates his suspicion that the cause of death was not natural. 3. Notice from a registrar of deaths that no cause has been assigned in a particular case, or that there had been a rapid death after a short illness. The conclusion to which experience leads in reference to these inquiries is, that the system affords no certainty for the detection of crime; that it aflords no protection to those who are wrongly charged with crime; and lastly, that in some cases it screens a criminal by a verdict based upon an imperfect inquiry, in which the important, medical facts are either not understood or are misinterpreted by the jury. No preliminary test of ability or capacity is required of the- coroner, although the Coroners Act, 1887, states that he shall be a: ^ fit person.' In Scotland, the office of coroner does not exist; but in place of this, there is an officer named Procurator Fiscal, generally a skilled solicitor, nominated by competent authority, and not elected by scot and lot voters. The general order issued to these officers by the Lord Advocate, enjoins that in cases where a dead body is discovered, the Procurator Fiscal shall obtain a medical report of the cause of death; and in cases of persons found dead, the body is generally inspected for this purpose. This, however, is at the option of the appointed officer, the instruction being in these wordsWherever, in his opinion, a written medical report is necessary for the due considera- tion of the case, he, the Procurator, shall obtain such a report from a duly quahfied medical practitioner.' The usual practice in England is to select the nearest medical practitioner, whether he has had any experience or not, and often to trust an important and delicate patholo- gical inquiry in the hands of one who probably has never before made an inspection. Under the present system coroners are empowered by the Coroners Act (50 and 51 Vict. c. 71, s. 21) to issue an order for the attendance of any legally qualified practitioner, ' at the time in actual practice in or near the place where the death happened.' A fee of two guineas is the maximum allowed for making a post-mortem examination, and, if considered necessary by the jurj^, a chemical analysis of the stomach and intestines. A penalty of five pounds is attached to disobedience of this order, except for reasonable cause. It is further enacted (50 and 51 Vict c. 71, s, 21) that 'if a majority of the jury sitting at an inquest are of opinion that the cause of death has not been satisfactorily explained by the evidence of the medical practitioner or other witnesses brought before them, they may require the coroner in writing to summon as a witness some other legally qualified medical practitioner named by them, and further to direct a post-mortem examination of the deceased, with or without an analysis of the contents of the stomach or intestines, to be made by such last-mentioned practitioner, and that whether such examination has been previously naade or not, and the coroner shall comply with such requisition, and in default shall be guilty of a misdemeanour.' Q


[30/872 b22652516_0030.jp2]

TKIAL AT THE ASSIZES. No medical man cian be compelled to undertake that which he feels incompetent to perform; and some medical practitioners who have felt this want of experience have properly declined to make chemical analyses involving so serious a responsibility. It is thus that, in cases of importance, analyses for coroners' inquests are now referred to experts appointed by the Home Secretary, and the practitioner discharges himself of that responsibility which the Coroners Act imposes upon him without any adequate remuneration. A coroner can obtain this assistance free of cost on application to the Home Secretary. Medical men are too ready to give their opinions of the cause of death for a coroner's inquest without making a post-mortem examina- tion of the body. No man is compelled to give an opinion upon insufficient data, and if by the institution of a judicial inquiry there are grounds for believing that a death has not been natural, no medical opinion of the cause should be given in the absence of an autopsy. Such an opinion must always be conjectural, and may involve the medical man in an unpleasant responsibility. Trial at the Assizes.—The next stage of the proceedings in a criminjtl case brings a medical witness before a superior court. For this purpose the witness is bound over by the coroner or magistrate, or a subpoena is issued. Every witness is bound to obey a subpoena, when with it, his reasonable expenses for the journey, etc., are tendered to him; but he is not bound to attend the trial except upon a subpoena, or when bound over. There are some questions connected with this subject which it will be proper to consider in this place. If a subpoena is served, on an ordinary or sJcilled medical witness, is he bound to obey it? In BettsY. Clifford (Warwick Lent Ass., 1858) Lord Campbell stated, in answer to a question, that a scientific witness was not bound to attend upon being served with a subpoena, and that he ought not to be supoenaed. If the witness knew any question of fact he might be compelled to attend, but he could not be compelled to give his attendance to speak to matters of opinion. In Rich V. Pierpoint, an action for malapraxis, Lee was summoned against his will to give evidence on the part of the plaintiff. He stated that on the evening before the trial a solicitor called on him and left a subpoena with him. Lee would not hear any account of the case which the solicitor proposed to give, and expressed his resolution to have nothing to do with the trial. The solicitor informed him that he would be required to pay the usual penalty if he did not attend. He went to Kingston, and was warned not to leave the Court until the •trial was over. He heard the evidence on the part of the plaintiff, and upon this and the medical evidence he gave his opinion—not much in favour of the party who summoned him, and not much against him. Lee considered that he could not avoid attending the trial under these circumstances. ('Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1862, i. p. 389.) In the case of Webb v. Page ('Carrington and Kirwan's Reports/ p. 23) the late Maule, J., ruled as follows:—'There is a distinction/ said his Lordship, ' between the case of a man who sees a fact and is •J


[31/872 b22652516_0031.jp2]

OBEDIENCE TO SUBPCENAS. called to prove it in a court of justice, and that of a man who is selected by a party to give his opinion on a matter on which he is peculiarly conversant from the nature of his employment in life. The former is bound, as a matter of public duty, to speak to a fact which happens to have fallen within his own knowledge, for without such testimony the course of justice must be stopped. The latter is under no such obliga- tion ; there is no such necessity for his evidence, and the party who selects him must pay him.' In the case referred to, a skilled witness had been subpoenaed, but he refused to give evidence unless first paid for his services and loss of time (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1862, i. p. 432). A barrister, who quotes this ruling, goes on to say: ' There is one reason why I should not advise any person in the position of a skilled witness totally to disregard a subpoena. It is quite clear that should such a person fail to attend a trial no attachment could issue, even if he were called as is usual upon the subpoena, because the party subpoenaing him could not make the requisite affidavits that he was damnified by the witnesses absence, and in what respect. But such party might bring an action for damages; and although he would recover none, he might not only worry, but might even put the defendant to a con- siderable expense, as taxed costs by no means include the entire costs in such cases. Although, therefore, I could not advise a total neglect of the subpoena, the safest course would be to obey it, and demand expenses before giving evidence. Such expenses would be only those allowed for a professional witness (not special fees), but if the person so subpoenaed were wilHng to run the risk of an action, he might safely absent himself without any fear of an attachment from the court for contempt.' With regard to the question whether a skilled witness would be permitted to demand a high fee for his attendance under such circumstances, the writer adds: ' To permit him legally to demand a high fee would perhaps look somewhat hke legally countenancing a bribe.' At all events there is no such legal recognition. In a case which came before the Court of Exch. {Maxted v. Morris, May, 1868), a witness wilfully disobeyed a subpoena. In consequence of this the trial was postponed, and the parties were put to great expense. An arrangement was made by which the witness bound himself to pay a part of the expenses. The Chief Baron said: It must be distinctly understood that in all cases where it , appeared to the court that there had been a wilful disobedience of a subpoena after proper service, such a contempt of court would be visited with the punishment it deserved. Martin B.: It was not to be tolerated that a man should exercise any discretion as to whether he would or would not attend a court in pursuance of subpoena. Enormous costs were incurred in preparing a case and bringing it down to trial, the whole of which were to be thrown away and wasted, because a man refused to obey a lawful summons to attend as a witness. Pigott, B: A sub- poena was not to be treated as mere waste paper. Public justice re- quired that persons wilfully committing contempt of court should be dealt with in such a manner as to teach them that they could not commit a contempt of court with impunity.


[32/872 b22652516_0032.jp2]

2d OBEDIENCE TO SUBPcENAS. MEDICAL FEES. Lord Campbell's dictum in reference to the distinction between fact and opinion confers no practical benefit on witnesses. It is at all times difficult in science, and in the medical sciences particularly, to separate them; and if a man appears to testify to a medical or scientific fact, he cannot avoid giving an opinion arising out of the fact. In an action against a druggist for a mistake in compounding medicine, an attempt was made to procure the author's opinion as a skilled witness at the trial, by reason of facts obtained from the report of a chemical analysis, the real object of which was at the time entirely concealed. The suit was fortunately compromised, and attendance was not necessary, but such a case should convey a caution to chemical experts. They may be employed under untrue statements to make analyses; these become facts on which they may be summoned like ordinary witnesses to give opinions as skilled witnesses, while the payment of the usual fee for a skilled witness is evaded. It would appear from the following case {MasJcemj v. O'Connor, Q.B., June, 1873) that medical men residing within the ' Bills of Mortality' are placed under exceptional circumstances. The plaintiff, a girl seven years old, appeared by her father, claiming damages of the defendant by reason of personal injuries sustained from careless driving. Leslie was called to prove the nature of the injuries, but he dechned to give evidence unless his medical fees were first paid. It appeared that he had been served with a subpcBna without any fee. A shilling was then tendered to him, but he still dechned to give evidence until either his expenses were paid or there was an undertaking to pay them. Quain, J., ruled that as Leslie resided within the ' Bills of Mortality,' all that he was entitled to was one shilling on his subpoena. The witness then produced a report of a case in which a medical man had successfully insisted on his fees being paid before giving evidence, but it appeared that he did not reside witliin the ' Bills of Mortality.' Leslie was accordingly sworn. The jury returned a verdict of damages against the defendant, and the judge refused to certify. It may be remarked of these Bills, which were commenced in 1592, that since 1840 they have been superseded in fact but not in law by the Eegistrar-General's weekly returns. They included latterly 148 parishes in Middlesex and Surrey, but excluded the large parishes of Marylebone and St. Pancras. The payment of medical fees should not depend upon the witness living within or without an antiquated boundary of this kind. In a case tried at the Carnarvon Assizes, Aug. 1872, a medical man had refused to sign the depositions which had been taken before the magistrates without being guaranteed a higher fee than that allowed by the county tariff". Bovill, C.J., told the witness that the Act of Parliament imposed an obligation upon him, and he had no power to refuse, and if he did so on another occasion he would be liable to be indicted for disobedience. The judge held that a medical man has no right to fix the amount of his expenses, but must always take the allowance the law gives him. (' Lancet,' 1872, ii. p. 204.) Medical Witnesses. —Assuming that the medical man has obeyed a


[33/872 b22652516_0033.jp2]

MEDICAL WITNESSES. subpoena, he will now be required to attend before the court, and to state, in the face of adverse counsel, the opinions which he has formed from the medical facts of the case, as well as the grounds for these opinions. He will then, for the first time, undergo the ordeal of a pubHc examination. Some medico-legal writers have considered it necessary to lay down rules respecting the manner in which a medical witness should give his evidence; how he is to act on cross- examination, and in what way he is to recover himself on re- examination. Any advice upon this head appears to be superfluous ■ since experience shows that these rules are invariably forgotten at the very moment when a person is most in need of them; A man who goes to testify to the truth to the best of his ability should bear in mind two points: 1 That he should be well prepared on all parts of the subject on which he is about to give evidence. He should act on these occasions upon the advice contained in the Latin motto, ne tentes aut perfice. 2. That his demeanour should be that of an educated man, and suited to the serious occasion on which he appears, even although he may feel himself provoked or irritated by the course of examination adopted^ A medical witness must not show a testy disposition in having his professional qualifica- tions, his experience, his means of knowledge, or the grounds for his opinions very closely investigated: he should rather prepare himself to meet with good humour the attempts of an adverse counsel to involve him in contradiction, and show by his answers that he has only a desire to state the truth. Law and custom have long established that a barrister, in defending a prisoner, has a right to make use of all fairj and even what may appear to the witness unfair means for the defence. Nothing can tend more to lower a witness in the opinion of the court and jury, and to diminish the value of his evidence, than the manifestation of a disposition to deal with his examiner as if he were a personal enemy, to evade the questions put, or to answer them with flippancy or anger. \ll such exhibitions invariably end in the discomfiture of the witness* It has been suggested that medical men on these occasions might take a lesson from lawyers, and observe how little they allow forensic differences, which they put on with their professional costume, to influence them in their intercourse with each other or with an adverse jildge or jury. Scientific experts sometimes lay themselves open to rebuke by setting up a claim of infallibility. In the English courts this is unusual, but in France and Italy, where argument is allowed, it is frequently witnessed* In a trial at Florence, involving a medico-legal question, the medical expert exclaimed in full court, ' Se sbaglio io, shaglia la scienza. If I err, science errs.' Medical men have complained, and on many occasions justly, of the licence of counsel. On this subject it rday be well to consider what has been said by a late high authority on the Bench, Erie, C.J.:—' The law trusts the advocate with a privilege in respect to the liberty of speech which is in practice bounded only by his own sense of duty; and he may have to speak upon subjects concerning the deepest


[34/872 b22652516_0034.jp2]

LICENCE OF COUNSEL. interests of social life, and the innermost feelings of the soul. The law also trusts him with a power of insisting upon answers to the most painful questioning, and this power again is in practice only controlled hy his own view of the interests of truth.' (Judgment in Kennedy V. Brown, 1862). Thus it will be seen that almost unhmited powers of interrogation are intrusted to counsel by the law, and it is a serious question whether the unrestricted use of these enormous powers is necessary to the administration of justice. One of the most severe reprimands on this abuse came from the same judge in a case which was before him in 1857 ; and was to this effect: A question had been put throwing on the witness an imputation for which there was really no foundation. The judge then said: ' The freedom of question allowed to the bar was a public nuisance, and the barrister who made such an imputation ought to be prosecuted. If a question had relation to the truth, he was most anxious it should be put, but to cast haphazard imputations at the suggestion of a person (an attorney) who might have no scruples as to what he did, was a degree of mischief that made him wish that a party should be prosecuted. He begged leave to say that in his experience he had seen counsel so abuse their privilege, that he had cordially wished a power could be instituted that they might be prosecuted for a misdemeanour.' Some medical men have claimed a privilege not to answer certain questions which are put to them, on the ground that the matters have come to their knowledge through private and confidential com- munications with their patients; but the law concedes no special privilege of this nature to members of the medical profession. No man is bound to reply to any question if the answer would tend in any way to incriminate himself—for no man is compelled to be a witness against himself. With this exception all questions must be answered, provided they are relevant to the case; and their relevancy is a matter for the consideration of the judge. Sometimes a witness makes a frivolous objection and refuses to answer an ordinary question, thus bringing only ridicule upon himself. A skilled expert, at an important trial, was asked his age. Instead of answering so simple a question at once, he angrily appealed to the judge to know whether he was bound to give an answer on a matter which, as he said, could have nothing to do with the case. The judge informed him that unless he had some very strong reasons for conceal- ing it, he had better state it. At a trial for murder b}'^ poison, in the course of a cross-examination, counsel for the prisoner asked the medical witness what remedy or antidote he had employed when he was first called to attend the deceased. He appealed to the judge to know whether he was bound to answer such a question as that. Judge: 'Yes, unless you have reason to beheve that your antidote killed the deceased. In that case you are not bound to answer it!' The question was immediately answered. As there is no special privilege granted to members of the profession, a witness must remember that there are no medical secrets. In the case of Duchess of Kingston this privilege of withholding statements


[35/872 b22652516_0035.jp2]

•23 MEDICAL SECRETS. was claimed by a medical witness, but rejected. In the case in which a woman was indicted for the murder of her infant, a surgeon was called to prove certain confessions made to him by her during his attendance on her. He objected, on the ground that he was then attending her as a private patient. Park, J., said this was not a suffi- cient reason to prevent a disclosure for the purpose of justice, and he was ordered to answer the question. Any statements, therefore, which are made to physicians or surgeons while attending persons in a private capacity, although they are not to be volunteered in evidence, must be given in answer to questions, whatever consequences may ensue. Cases of poisoning, wounding, and child-murder, as well as cases which involve questions of hfe-insurance, divorce, or the legitimacy of ofispring, may be materially affected by the answers of a medical man on matters which have been the subject of private communications. A professional man who claims a privilege where none is allowed, is endeavouring to set himself above the law. There is no real breach of confidence under these circumstances, because, as Gordon Smith justly observes, ' Society in general receives the authority of courts as paramount to all obstacles and private considerations, so that in yield- ing to such an authority, a professional man will be fully acquitted even in the opinion of those who may be the sufferers by his evidence. The expressed opinion of the judge will be a full indemnity for the witness. (' Analysis of Med. Evid.,' p. 98.) Any medical man, how- ever, who voluntarily violated the confidence reposed in him by a patient, or who communicated professional secrets to counsel, apart from a public necessity in court, would justly lay himself open to censure. In Wright v. Wilkin (June, 1865), a suit involving the validity of the will of a lady, the only question before Kindersley, V.-C, was as ito the costs, occasioned by the refusal of a medical witness to answer a question in reference to the disease of which the testatrix had died. The witness had attended the testatrix, and on being asked of what disease she had died, he refused to answer, on the ground of professional privilege and also that the question was irrelevant. The Vice-Chan- cellor said,,that he could not possibly see the relevancy of the question, and, further, of what use it was to examine witnesses at all in the cause. No reason was given for so doing. The question of costs would, j9nm(X facie, have been left till the hearing but that it was a dangerous precedent to allow a witness to decline answering on such grounds. He was clearly of opinion that the witness could not claim professional confidence or irrelevancy, as an excuse for not answering the question, and he must pay the costs. From this judgment it will be perceived that even the refusing to answer an irrelevant questioh may lead to the infliction of a heavy penalty on a medical practitioner. A man who refuses to answer a question which the court considers to be relevant and proper, may render himself liable to imprisonment for contempt. In a case in the Divorce Court (Babbage v. Babbage, 1875), the wife had petitioned and obtained a decree nisi for a dissolu- tion of marriage on account of her husband's adultery. Subsequently


[36/872 b22652516_0036.jp2]

MEDICAL PRIVILEGE. 24 to this she wrote a letter to her medical attendant, admitting that she herself had been guilty of adultery. He, when called as a witness, declined to produce the letter or state its contents on account of pro- . fessional confidence. The judge said he knew of no such privilege as that claimed by the witness. In a court of justice he was bound to produce or state the contents of the letter. See also a case by Braxton Hicks. (' Lancet,' 1885, ii. p. 285.) The question of medical privilege has presented itself on some . occasions in a medico-ethical aspect, as where, for instance, during his attendance on a patient, a suspicion arises in the mind of a medical man that the person is undergoing slow poisoning. It has been supposed that when, under these circumstances, the poisoner was himself in the medical profession, there would be a breach of etiquette in com- municating to others the suspicion entertained; There is no code of medical etiquette by which any member of the profession is bound to conceal the fact of poisoning which he believes to be going on before his eyes, whether perpetrated by a medical man or any other person ; and at the same time there is a higher code of ethics which makes the prevention of secret murder and the safety of society paramount to all other considetations. A medical man must take care not to charge another with a crime upon loose suspicion. If, from the nature of the symptoms, the absence of any natural cause for the illness, and the inefficiency of ordinary remedies, he suspects that the patient is under the influence of poison, it is his duty to lose no time in confirming or removing that suspicion by a proper medical and chemical investigation. If his suspicion is confirmed by the discovery of poison in the food or urine, then steps must be immediately taken to save the life of the patient. In Reg. v. Wooler (Durham Wint. Ass., 1855), in which the prisoner was charged with the murder of his wife by secretly administering to her arsenic, three medical men were in attendance. There was a suspicion that arsenic was being administered to the deceased nineteen days before her death ; but the fact was not made known because these gentlemen were unable to satisfy themselves conclusively that arsenic was present in the urine. They appealed to high authority to aid them, but the advice reached them too late,—the patient had died, and, as it was clearly proved, from the effects of arsenic. The judge who tried this case said, 'When the idea of poisoning struck them they ought to have communicated their suspicion to the husband if they did not suspect him, and if they did suspect him they ought to have gone before a magistrate, and not have gone on from the 8th to the 27th June seeing the woman murdered before their eyes.' Christison, in commenting upon this case, very properly takes excep- tion to this advice, and any man acting upon it would expose himself to an action for slander. ' Ideas' of poisoning often arise in cases .of disease where the symptoms deviate a little from the ordinary course, but they are dismissed on further observation. If, in the absence of the means or knowledge of applying chemical tests, or of taking the opinions of others experienced in toxicology, a medical man charged


[37/872 b22652516_0037.jp2]

25 DUTIES OF MEDICAL MEN* the husband of a woman with secret poisoning, or went before a magistrate and charged him pubHcly, he would be acting with rash- ness, ruin his own practice and reputation, and be mulcted in heavy damages for the irreparable injury done by a false accusation. Such a step should be taken upon something more than a suspicion. A prudent and conscientious man will always await the result of a chemical analysis before giving publicity to a suspicion which may after all turn out to be unfounded; and he will lose no time in obtaining this necessary confirmation or a removal of his doubts. When the suspicion is confirmed, there is some difference of opinion as to the course to be pursued. Christison advises that when a medical man is satisfied of the fact of poisoning, he should communi- cate his conviction to the patient himself, and that he ought not to be deterred by the chance of injury to his patient from making even so dreadful a disclosure. He will have thus taken the surest preparative step to prevent a repetition of the poisoning. Whether this communi- cation be made to the patient or not, the proper course will be to place the matter immediately in the hands of a magistrate for investigation. The author was consulted in a case of supposed slow poisoning. The symptoms suffered by a lady, taken as a whole, were not reconcilable with any disease. The medical man had an ' idea' that poison might possibly be the cause, but before acting upoft this idea he sent to the author a portion of urine for examination. Antimony was found in it, and the cause of the symptoms was at once explained. The medical attendant communicated the result of the an^ilysis to the members of the family, and the symptoms of poisoning ceased from that time. In one instance within the editor's knowledge, the suspicion of poisoning was communicated to the husband of the patient. He at once com- mitted suicide • and chemical analysis proved the secret administration of arsenic. In another case, strychnine was found in some cocoa of which a lady had partaken. The fact was communicated by the medical attendant to a magistrate; and thtis the medical man was relieved of further responsibility. In a third case a woman was seen by three medical men in consultation; and tWo of them were of opinion that she Was being slowly poisoned by antimony. The third was of a contrary opinion. Some urine from the patient was forthwith sent for analysis. No antimony was found; and the patient died very shortly afterwards from cancer of the abdominal viscera. Each case must be treated on its own merits. The error committed by medical men is on these occasions, not in claiming a privilege of concealment, but in allowing a doubt upon so serious a question to remain in their minds for days or weeks. This question was brought into prominence at the trial of Dr. Pritchard at Edinburgh (July, 1865), on the charge of poisoning his wife with antimony. One of the medical witnesses, who saw the deceased a fortnight before her death, and at other times, stated in his evidence at the trial that he suspected she was suffering from the effects of antimony when he first saw her, but it seems that there the matter was allowed to remain. No one was accused, but no step was


[38/872 b22652516_0038.jp2]

26 EXAMINATION-IN-CHIEF. CROSS-EXAMINATION, taken to prevent the continuance of the poisoning, the suspicion of which turned out to be well-founded. Lord Justice Clerk, who tried this case, is reported to have said that no notions of medical etiquette should be permitted to interfere with those higher duties which every right-minded man owes to his neighbour, and which are to be ex- pected in a tenfold degree from every medical man, because his hfe is solemnly devoted to the preservation of life and the prevention of its destruction. Examination-in-chief.—The ordinary course of proceeding in a criminal case is thus concisely stated by Stephen, J. After opening the case, the counsel for the Crown calls the witnesses, and examines them according to the rules of evidence—that is, he brings out, by questions which do not suggest their answers, the facts relevant to the issue to be tried which are within his personal knowledge. Those questions which do suggest the answers, are called 'leading' questions. With one exception it is not the practice to allow these to be put in this part of the examination. The exception is : ' When the judge is satisfied, either by a witness's demeanour or by contradictions between the evidence and the depositions, that he is trying to keep back the truth and favour the prisoner, he may, in his discretion, allow the counsel for the Crown to ask leading questions and, as the phrase is, to treat the witness as hostile.' When the examination-in-chief is closed, the next step is the cross-examination. Cross-examination.—In this, the second stage, the counsel for the prisoner extracts from the medical witness, by questions which may suggest the answers in the strongest form, any facts that may appear to be favourable to his client, and which he believes to be within the witness's knowledge. Leading questions are not only allowable in this part of the examination, but, according to good authority, a counsel for the defence can hardly lead too much. The theory of the law is that the witness is unfavourable to the prisoner and has come to bear evidence against him. The more he has shown himself by conduct or conversation a partisan in the case, the more severely will he be treated. Anything which he may have said in the hearing of others, or published in journals, or even written in private letters (if the contents transpire), in reference to the case, or the guilt of the prisoner, is now brought to light, although he may have supposed that what he did say was in perfect confidence. It is at this stage of the case that any exaggerations which may have been most favourably received by the counsel for the prosecution, are reduced to their true proportions. Any bias by which the mind of a witness may have been influenced, or any imperfection or confusion of memory as to facts, is here brought out. It is in this part of his examination that a witness will be closely questioned as to his qualifications, his age, the time during which he has been engaged in practice, the' accuracy of his judgment, his general professional knowledge, and his special experi- ence in reference to the matter in issue, the number of cases he has seen, etc. Straightforward answers should be given to all these questions. No harm can be done to the witness by the answers


[39/872 b22652516_0039.jp2]

27 RE-EXAMINATION. QUOTATIONS FROM BOOKS. unless they are given evasively, since it is not to be supposed that a witness wishes to represent himself differently from what he is. If he does make the attempt he will assuredly fail. The most striking distinction between the examination-in-chief and cross-examination is in reference to leading questions. It rests upon the assumption that there is a danger that a witness will say whatever is suggested to him by the one side, and conceal everything that is not extorted from him on the other. It need scarcely be observed that witnesses whose evidence is of little importance in the case, are rarely cross-examined. This is reserved in its most stringent form for those whose facts and opinions are hkely to affect the fate of a prisoner on a criminal trial. In dealing with a skilled witness whose evidence may be of import- ance, the questions in cross-examination are usually put by the counsel for the prisoner with great caution, or the answers brought out may be even more adverse to his own case than those elicited in the examination-in-chief. Re-examination.—The cross-examination is usually followed by a re-examination on the part of the counsel for the Crown, or of the counsel by whom the witness has been called. The object of this is to clear up or explain any portion of the evidence which may have been rendered obscure or doubtful by the cross-examination. It is sometimes unnecessary to put a question, and if the witness has given his evidence consistently and fairly no questions may be asked. As a rule the re-examination must be confined to those matters which have arisen out of the cross-examination. Any questions upon new subjects may render a further cross-examination on them necessary. In reference to facts, a medical witness must bear in mind that he should not allow his testimony to be influenced by the consequences which may follow from his statement of them, or their probable efiect on any case which is under trial. In reference to opinions, their possible influence on the fate of a prisoner should inspire caution in forming them, but when once formed they should be honestly and candidly stated without regard to consequences. It will be well to remember, in reference to each stage of the examination, what William Hunter has said:—' To make a show and appear learned and ingenious in natural knowledge may flatter vanity. To know facts, to separate them from supposition, to arrange and connect them, to make them plain to ordinary capacities, and above all to point out their useful applications, should be the chief object of ambition.' Quotations from Books.—It is a not unfrequent custom with counsel to refer to medical works during the examination of a witness. He is expected to have a fair knowledge of the writings of professional men on the subject of inquiry. The authority is mentioned, the passage is quoted, and the witness may be then asked whether he agrees with the yiews of the author or whether he differs; and if so, his reasons. In cases connected with medical treatment, the views of the profession are and have been so various, that a barrister would have no great difficulty in finding some book to oppose to the opinions of a witness. Standard works of recent date are so well known to the profession.


[40/872 b22652516_0040.jp2]

2 8 MEDICAL EVIDENCE. QUOTATIONS FROM BOOKS. that there are few medical men engaged in practice who are not well acquainted with and able to explain the views of the writers, and how far they agree or conflict with their own. The witness must be on his guard that the quotation is fairly made, and that it is properly taken with the context, or he may unexpectedly find himself involved in a difficulty. On one occasion a barrister stopped in his quotation at a comma, and on another occasion the quotation ended at a colon; the remainder of the sentemce iu each case materially weakening the infer- ence which it was intended to draw with the apparent sanction of the witness. When a quotation from a standard work is thus opposed to the evidence of a medical witness, he should ask to look at the book, and see by reference to the work itself that the passage is correctly quoted. A remarkable instance of the importance of this caution occurred at the Swansea Lent Ass., 1869, in an action brought against a railway company for compensation for personal injury. The plaintiff was proved to have had pneumonia shortly after the accident, and the counsel for the company wished to show that the pneumonia had not arisen from the physical injury. In cross-examining the medical witness he asked, ' Cannot pneumonia be produced by shock ?' Witness: ' I do not beheve it to be possible.' Counsel: ' What! do you mean to say you do not believe what is asserted in fact by no less an authority than Professor Taylor ? Have you read Dr. - Taylor's work on " Medical Jurisprudence " ? ' Witness: '■ Yes.' Counsel: ' Have you seen the last edition? ' Witness: ' No.' Counsel: ' I have it here (turning over the leaves of a book), and a case is given of pneumonia being caused by shock.' It was subsequently discovered on refen'ing to the work, that the case in question was one in which the lung had been wounded by a fractured rib. The cause of the pneumonia was thus sufficiently explained: it was proved to have been the simple result of physical injury and not of shock. A reference at the time to the work which is quoted, is always necessary if any use is to be made of a quotation. Without suggesting that there is intentional misrepresentation to bear out a particular view of the case, a barrister in dealing with the medical facts may wholly misunder- stand the author's views and statements, and in some instances wrongly assign to the author himself opinions which he has merely quoted from other authorities for comment or illustration. As a rule, the works of a living author cannot be quoted, it being a legal maxim that secondary evidence is only admissible when primary evidence cannot be obtained : hence, as a li\^ng author can be called as a witness, his works cannot be quoted in evidence. {Reg. v. Lamson, C.C.C., March, 1882.) Presence in Court.—In England medical and scientific witnesses, except under special circumstances, are allowed to be present in court, and hear the whole of the evidence of the case. This is in some instances absolutely necessary if the court requires medical opinions, for unless the witnesses are fully acquainted with the facts they can give no opinions, and they can only become well acquainted with the


[41/872 b22652516_0041.jp2]

PRESENCE OF WITNESSES IN COURT. ' 29 facts by being allowed to be present and hearing the evidence in court. If excluded, the judge or counsel will be compelled to read to the witness notes of the evidence before an opinion can be given, and it may then appear that some small point which counsel did not think of importance, has been omitted: this, if known to the witness, might however, materially affect his opinion. A failure of justice is likely to occur when medical witnesses are excluded, and it is generally when there is no defence or a false defence that the right of excluding them is exercised. The rule in Scotland is similar; medical and scientific witnesses are allowed to be in court during the trial. The examination of the witnesses for the Crown is followed by the defence of the prisoner, either in person or by his counsel who acts throughout the part of an advocate, simply securing for his client every advantage the facts or the law may afford him. In other words, he sees that his client is tried strictly according to law, and not condemned contrary to law. A key to some of the difficulties which medical witnesses must be prepared to encounter will be found in the exposition given by Stephen, J., of the tacit rules which regulate the duties of counsel for the prosecution and defence :—' In practice it is universally admitted that the counsel for the prosecution is morally and profession- ally bound always to keep in sight the ultimate object—namely, the discovery of truth; whereas no such obligation is laid upon the prisoner and those who represent him, because it is too much to expect of human nature that they should discharge it, and it is better not to impose an obligation which is sure to be systematically violated. Both sides, on the other hand, are bound in the strongest way not to do anything to propagate falsehood. The counsel for the Crown is bound not to suppress any fact within his knowledge favourable to the prisoner; and, on the other hand, the counsel for the prisoner is bound not to bring to light facts within his knowledge unfavourable to the prisoner. The counsel for the Crown may not use arguments to prove the guilt of the prisoner which he does not himself beheve to be just, and he is bound to warn the jury of objections which may diminish the weight of his arguments : in short, as far as regards the evidence which he brings forward, his speech should as much as possible resemble the summing-up of the judge. He should contend not for the success of his cause at all events, but for the full recognition by the judge and jury of that side of the truth which makes in favour of it. On the other hand, the counsel for the prisoner may use arguments which he does not believe to he just. It is the business of the jury, after hearing the judge, to say whether they are or are not just.' The last remark shows what appears to be a serious defect in the administration of the criminal law. While in a case of mis- demeanour a prisoner may be tried by a special jury, in a case of felony, involving an analysis of important questions of medical science in reference to murder or manslaughter, the trial takes place before a common and comparatively ignorant jury. Such a jury is hardly in a position to cope with an ingenious counsel, who has it in his power to misrepresent and distort medical facts and opinions in any manner


[42/872 b22652516_0042.jp2]

30 MEDICAL WITNESSES. RULES RESPECTING THE that he pleases. The defences made are frequently such as no barrister would venture to place before a jury of educated men. Another observation made by Stephen, J., more nearly concerns the medical witness :—' There are many obligations which affect each side equally. Neither is at liberty to attempt to browbeat, intimidate, or confuse a witness, although they may expose any real confusion which exists in his mind, or test, by the strictest cross-examination, the accuracy of his statements. Neither is at liberty wilfully to mis- understand a witness, or to misstate, in his address to the jury, the effect of what he has said, either by distortion or suppression. The neglect or observation of these and other rules of the same kind practically establishes a wide distinction, and x)ne which is easily recognized, between those who exercise a noble profession and those who disgrace it.' Assuming that a medical witness is properly prepared for the dis- charge of his duties, and that the questions put to him are answered fairly and truly, according to his knowledge and experience, without exaggeration or concealment, he has no reason to fear any attempt at intimidation. The normal barrister, as depicted by Stephen, J., is not at liberty, in his address to the jury, to misrepresent, either by distortion or sup- pression, the medicai facts or opinions given in a case. According to our experience, however, misrepresentation is a not unfrequent practice, and one of which medical witnesses have very strong reason to com- plain. Whether such misstatements are wilful or not it may be difficult to determine, but their effect on the jury is well known to those who employ them, and they frequently escape the observation of the counsel on the other side, and even of the judge, unless he is well versed in medical subjects. Intimidation is sometimes carried very far. On a trial for murder by poisoning, a respectable country practitioner, who had given his evidence for the Crown in a fair and proper manner, was thus addressed in cross-examination by counsel:—' On your oath, sir, and in the face of the whole profession, will you venture to persist in that statement?' &c. A writer, in commenting upon this subject, says, ' But the hardest and most unfair part of the system (of cross-examination) is when witnesses have to bear a loud and insulting tone or gesture without remonstration or retaliation.' At the trial of Kelly for the murder of Police-constable Talbot [Reg. v. Eelly, Dublin Commis. Court, Nov. 1871), Tuffnell, a surgeon of repute, and formerly Professor of Surgery, was summoned as a witness for the prosecution. Having deposed to the nature of the wounds, and that the deceased had died from the effects, he was subjected to the usual ordeal of a cross-examination, but in a somewhat unusual form. Counsel for the prisoner having begun by addressing him in a loud and offensive tone, he turned to the Chief Baron, and said, ' My Lord, I am very excitable, and if this gentleman has a right to roar at me, I consider that I have a right to roar too/ The Court expressed a hope that it would not be necessary for him tp roar, and intitnated, after a short trial of vocal strength between the


[43/872 b22652516_0043.jp2]

31 EXAMINATION OF WITNESSES. two opponents, that counsel's manner to the witness was not what it ought to be. Counsel disclaimed any intention of being offensive, but claimed the liberty which is usually conceded in cases of importance. Whatever may be the importance of a case to a prisoner, nothing can justify the putting of questions in a loud and insulting tone to a skilled professional witness. The very mild rebuke administered to counsel on this occasion was not likely to produce much eftect, and accordingly this trial presents, in a concentrated form, all the defects of our method of getting at truth by cross-examination. Rules for the delivery of Evidence.—There are a few rules bearing upon medical evidence which, if observed, may save the witness from interruption or reproof, and place him in a favourable position with the court:— 1. The questions put on either side should receive direct answers, and the manner of the witness should not be perceptibly different, whether he is replying to a question put by the counsel for the prose- cution or for the defence. Most of the questions put by counsel in cross-examination will admit of an answer ' yes' or ' no.' If, from the ingenious or casuistical mode in which the question is framed, the wit- ness should feel that the simple affirmative or negative might mislead the court, then, after giving the answer, he can appeal to the judge to allow him to qualify it, or add to it any matter within his own know- ledge and which is at the same time relevant to the case. The witness must remember that he takes an oath to state the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. On the other hand, while the counsel for the defence is bound not to introduce falsehood, his object is not the discovery or development of truth. Unless the witness is on his guard, he may find that his affirmatives and negatives may be worked into a shape representing the reverse of what he intended. Some counsel adopt the ingenious plan of compressing two or three questions into one ; or they submit a series of questions, more than one of which may contain two opposite alternatives, and then ask for a plain answer ' yes ' or ' no ' to both of them together. A witness may unthinkingly answer that question which has most fixed his attention. The same answer may not be strictly applicable to all, but it may be found, when too late, that it is made so in the defence. Under these circumstances he should ask for a severance of the questions and give separate replies. Direct answers are necessary, because it is only by them that the case can be brought clearly before the court and jury in all its details. Medical witnesses sometimes forget this, and fall into answers to questions floating in their own minds, or which they think are likely to be put to them. They are also sometimes disposed to anticipate many questions by one general answer. This simply creates confusion, and the witness will be told by counsel to keep to the question, and that he is coming to the other matters presently. Care should be taken by a medical witness not to argue with counsel Argument is not evidence, and the entering into it disturbs the order of the proceedings. Arguments between counsel and witnesses, and even between medical witnesses theins^lves- are riot allowed. Th^


[44/872 b22652516_0044.jp2]

32 RULES FOR THE DELIVERY OF MEDICAL EVIDENCE. mode in which questions are put by counsel in cross-examination sometimes tends to the introduction of argument, but the witness should avoid the temptation to enter into it. What he says under such circumstances is not evidence, except in the form of answers to questions, and he is there only for the purpose of stating what is relevant to the case. 2. The replies should be concise, distinct, and audible; and, except where explanation may be necessary, they should be confined strictly to the terms of the questions. The judge who tries the case, generally takes full notes of the medical evidence—hence the necessity for a slow and distinct delivery of the evidence. Some witnesses have a habit of not answering the question which is asked, but one which is not asked. Others give an answer in such a voluble form that there is great difficulty in reducing it to its proper proportions. A witness who is so profuse of information generally supplies abundant matter for a long and troublesome cross-examination. It has been a question whether a witness should volunteer evidence, assuming that the examiijation-in-chief and cross-examination have failed to bring out all that he knows of the case. If that which he has to state is some matter of fact within his own knowledge, or an opinion based on facts within his knowledge, he will be allowed, on appHcation to the judge, to make the statement in spite of the efforts of counsel on either side to shujb it out. It is scarcely necessary to observe, that the language in which the answers are returned should neither be technical nor metaphorical. Counsel who are unacquainted with medical terms frequently misapply them, or use them in a wrong sense. On a trial for murder, in which one of the questions at issue was whether dysentery or poison was the cause of death, the counsel puzzled one* of the medical witnesses by asking him whether during his attendance he found any traces of ' dysuria ' in the faeces. There is no doubt he intended a state of the fseces like that met with in dysentery, but the professional term employed by him signified a ' difficulty in passing urine,' A judicious witness will avoid anything like a triumph over his examiner under euch circumstances, and simply put him right. 3. Answers to questions should be neither ambiguous, undecided, nor evasive. An ambiguous answer necessarily leaves the witness's meaning doubtful, and calls for an explanation. An undecided answer is not sufficient for evidence. Did the wound cause death ? Was death caused by loss of blood, or by poison ? If, by a proper consideration of all the medical facts, the witness has come to a conclusion on the subject, his answer should be expressed in plain and decided language, either in the affirmative or negative. A man who has formed no con- clusion is not in a position to give evidence. No opinion should be given for which the witness is not prepared to assign reasons, and, except by permission of the court, no medical opinion should be expressed on facts or circumstances observed by others. A hesitating witness will be met with the question, Have you any doubt about it ? or, Was it so, or not ?—to which a reply in the affirmative or negative


[45/872 b22652516_0045.jp2]

KULES FOR THE DELIVERY OF MEDICAL EVIDENCE. 33 must be given. If the witness fairly entertains doubts about the matter at issue, it is his duty to express them, and not allow them to be ex- torted from him piecemeal by a series of questions. Chemists have occasionally certified to the discovery of ' imper- ceptible,' ' unmistakable,' or ' undoubted' traces of poison in the liver, etc. Such terms naturally convey to the shrewd mind of an examiner that the witness has some lurking doubt or suspicion of mis- take in his mind, for that of which we are sure requires no such terms to express our meaning. If poison has been discovered, the statement of the fact is sufficient. 4. The replies should be made in simple language, free from techni- calities and exaggeration.. Some remarks have been elsewhere made in reference to the use of technical terms in drawing up medico-legal reports (p. 14). If medical men could be made aware of the ridicule which they thus bring on their evidence, otherwise good, they would at once try to dispense with such language. A witness is perhaps un- consciously led to speak as if he were addressing a medical assembly, instead of plain men like the members of a common jury who are wholly ignorant of the meaning of medical terms, and barristers who are but imperfectly acquainted with them. A court may be told that the ' integuments were reflected from the thorax, and the costal carti- lages laid bare, when a wound was found which had penetrated through the anterior mediastinum,'' and had involved the arch of the aorta, etc. A simple cut in the skin is described as ' an incision in the integu- ments.' In a case of alleged child-murder, a medical witness being asked for a plain opinion of the cause of death, said that it was owing ' to atelectasis and a general engorgement of the pulmonary tissue.' On a trial for an assault, a surgeon, in giving his evidence, informed the court that on examining the prosecutor, he found him suffering from a severe contusion of the integuments under the left orbit, with great extravasation of blood and ecchymosis in the surrounding cellular tissue, which was in a tumefied state. There was also considerable abrasion of the cuticle. ' Judge : You mean, I suppose, that the man had a bad black eye ? Witness : Yes. Judge : Then why not say so at once ? ' It would be easy to multiply examples of this kind. This is not science but pedantry, and if such language is employed by a witness with a view to impressing the court with some idea of his learning, it wholly fails of its effect. Barristers and reporters put down their pens in despair, and the time of the court is wasted until the witness has condescended to translate his ideas into ordinary language. Lord Hatherley well observed that ' a scientific witness in giving his evidence should avoid as much as possible the use of tech- nical scientific language, if the case is before a jury. This is especially desirable when the evidence is medical, for really many technical words in medicine seem to be invented to cover ignorance. But be this as it may, a witness is always suspected of affectation, and the court and jury are but little instructed when a vast amount of learned phraseology is poured forth instead of a clear statement of the witness's opinion.' Exaggerated language should be avoided. There is a tendency D


[46/872 b22652516_0046.jp2]

34 RULES FOR THE DELIVERY OF MEDICAL EVIDENCE. among some medical witnesses to express their own views in the superlative degree. If a part is simply inflamed, it is frequently described as ' intensely' inflamed. This use of exaggerated language often leads to apparent conflict in medical testimony. It is not credit- able to the witness, and throws a doubt upon the whole of his evidence. 5. In giving evidence of opinion a medical witness must take care not to base it on any statements made by others, or on circumstances which may have come to his knowledge by public rumour. Again, his evidence should be confined only to subjects properly within the range of medical science, and on which, as a professional man, he is competent to speak. In a trial for murder by wounding, in which the identity of the prisoner was in question, a medical man stated that he compared certain footmarks with the boots taken from the prisoner, and he found that they corresponded. A comparison had also been made, but not at the same time, by a police-officer, more accustomed to matters of this kind. On cross-examination, there was such a want of agreement between the surgeon and the constable, respecting the number of nails in the boots and the number indicated by the foot- prints, that no reliance could be placed on this portion of the evidence. In reference to this discrepancy, the learned judge remarked that a medical man should confine himself to matters belonging to his own profession, and not take upon himself the duties of a police-constable. There are some points in reference to gunshot wounds which can be better explained by a gun or shot-manufacturer than by a medical witness.—Cyique in sua arte credendum. Fees.—The following information as to fees payable to medical witnesses may be useful to the medical practitioner:— In the Supreme Court of Judicature, and in the Court of Appeal, £1 l5. a day if resident in the metropolis ; and £2 25. to £3 3s. a day if resident at a distance from the place of trial, inclusive of all except travelling expenses. For travelhng expenses a sum not ex- ceeding 3c?. per mile each way if there be a railway, and Qd. per mile each way if there be no railway. It is customary to pay return first-class, or sometimes second-class, railway fare only. In the Divorce Court, £1 Is. a day if resident within five miles of the General Post Office. Higher charges are allowed for experts. Sundays are never counted. In the County Court, lOs. to £1 Is. a day is aflowed. At Assizes, medical men attending to give professional evidence are usually allowed £1 Is. a day, 2s. for every night they are away from home, and second-class travelling expenses by rail, or a sum not exceeding ^d. a mile each way when there is no raflway. Every registered medical practitioner is entitled, if formally sum- moned, to a fee of £1 Is. for attending to give evidence at a coroner's inquest, where no post-mortem examination is ordered, and to an additional fee of £1 Is.—£2 2s. in all—when an examination is ordered. The fee for a post-mortem examination will not be paid if the examina- tion has not been ordered in writing. These fees are to be paid by the coroner immediately after the close of the inquest. There is no pro- vision for a second attendance at an adjourned inquest, nor for making


[47/872 b22652516_0047.jp2]

35 FEES. CAUSES OF DEATH. SYNCOPE. a second post-mortem examination. Some coroner's are in the habit of paying £1 Is. for each day's attendance. Others pay £1 Is. only for all the attendances, however many. No unregistered medical prac- titioner, whatever his diplomas may be, can claim fees for giving medical evidence. In all cases where attendance is required in a civil court to give expert evidence, a special agreement should be made in writing, binding the solicitor who requires the attendance to himself pay the fees, as these are only recoverable from principals, unless there is a special agreement to the contrary. The fee for attendance in a Police Court is 10s. Qd., or £1 Is. if more than two miles distant. CHAPTER 8. MODES OF DYING.—SYNCOPE, ASPHYXIA, COMA.—SUDDEN DEATH.—SIGNS OP DEATH.—CESSATION OP CIECUJiATlON AND RESPIKATION.—COOLING QF THE BODY.—CADAVERIC RIGIDITY,—^PUTREPACTION.—CHANGES PRODUCED IN THE VISCERA.—PUTREFACTION MISTAKEN FOR GANGRENE. Medical jurisprudence takes cognisance of all violent causes of death, and is only indirectly involved in those cases of natural death which simulate the effects of violence. Thus all causes which operate to produce death suddenly, especially demand the attention of a medical jurist. These may be either natural or violent; and the distinction between them is of importance, since the guilt or innocence of a person charged with crime may depend on a eoiTcct determination of the cause. The continuance of life depends upon the proper and regulated action of the heart, the lungs, and the brain ; and the interdependence of these organs is such that the arrest of the functions of one of them, is speedily followed by the arrest of the functions of the others. Hence they have been called the tripod of life. When the suspension of the motions of the heart is the primary cause of death, the person is said to die by syncope. The term asphyxia is applied to death which begins by the lungs; and coma to that which arises from a primary disturbance of the functions of the brain. Syncope {avyKSina}, signifying to strike down).—In order that the action of the heart should be maintained, it is necessary, first, that the blood supplied to it should be in sufficient quantity, and secondly, that this blood should be of proper quality. In death from haemor- rhage we have an instance of deficiency, and in death from certain poisons as well as diseases, an illustration of defect of blood (asthenia). In ordinary syncope (fainting or swooning) there is simply a deficiency in the quantity of blood which passes through the heart, although there is no actual loss of this fluid from the circulation. Certain diseases which affect the muscular structure of the heart, as well as its valves "and blood-vessels, may also lead to a sudden arrest


[48/872 b22652516_0048.jp2]

SYNCOPE. ASPHYXIA. 36 of its functions. These morbid conditions produce a mechanical impediment to the motions of the organ by which the blood is pro- pelled, and death by syncope is the necessary result. One of the most striking of the phenomena which attend this mode of dying (death from haemorrhage or anaemia), is an extreme pallor of the face, hands, and lips, and indeed of the body generally. The patient is very rest- less, tossing the limbs about in all directions.. Giddiness and nausea are often complained of, and actual vomiting may occur. In many cases vision is extinguished, everything appearing black. There is transient delirium, which soon passes into insensibility. The pulse becomes more and more weak and irregular, until at length it is imperceptible. The respiratory movements are repeated at uncertain intervals, and have a sighing, or gasping character. Towards the last there are general convulsions (Fagge on the ' Different Modes of Dying,' ' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1879, p. 343). In these cases the heart is found empty and contracted at the autopsy. When, however, from any cause, there is sudden stoppage of the heart, the right and left cavities of this organ are found to contain blood in the normal proportion in which that fluid is ordinarily circulated. Blbod is found in the large veins (venae cavae) as well as in the arterial trunks. There is no congestion or accumula- tion of blood in the lungs or brain. Asphyxia (a priv, and fftpv^is pulse, signifying pulselessness).—This state is induced by any cause which arrests the function of respiration. The term apnoea (from d priv. and' Trj/eo?, I respire) is less appropriate, and is now apphed by physiologists to an exactly opposite condition—that which consists in an excessive supply of oxygen to the blood, rendering respiratory movements for the time unnecessary. The various forms of death by suffocation, as in the obstruction of the air-passages from mechanical causes in drowning, hanging, and strangulation, furnish illustrations of death commencing by the lungs, or asphyxia. The effect of cutting off air from the lungs is that the blood is not aerated, and it is therefore circulated in a state unfitted to support the nutrition of the heart and brain. It is necessarily distributed with the impuri- ties derived from the wastfe of tissue, and thus acts as a poison to all the organs. It is incapable of sustaining nerve-force or muscular irritability. It stagnates in the capillary vessels of the lungs, produces a languid action of the heart by its circulation through the muscular structure of this organ, and causes insensibility by its distribution through the blood-vessels of the brain. The lungs, by purifying the blood, are essential to the circulation. Death from asphyxia may be therefore regarded as death from defect of blood. The observations of Brodie and others have clearly proved that, in spite of the im- purity of the blood, the heart will continue to act and the circula- tion to be maintained for two or three minutes, or longer, after breathing has entirely ceased. This may be proved by hanging or strangling an animal, and observing the condition of the heart. As the action of this organ continues after the animal has ceased to breathe, life is not actually extinct; and imder favourable circumstances, it may be restored, if no injury be done to the air-cells of the lungs, so


[49/872 b22652516_0049.jp2]

37 DEATH FROM ASPHYXIA. long as this action continues. The circulation of the unaerated blood through the brain, appears to annihilate sensibility, so that no con- sciousness or feeling exists, and the person is to all appearance dead. Supposing that the suspension of respiration is complete, the action of the heart gradually slackens and finally stops. It is at this period of the complete arrest of the motions of the heart that asphyxia passes into death. There are many diseases which operate fatally by arresting the functions of the lungs ; and these may be regarded as furnishing the natural causes of asphyxia. The violent causes, in- cluding not only the ordinary modes of suffocation, but the effects of certain poisons, are not difficult to appreciate, provided a true history of the case can be obtained. Michael Foster has shown how, in experiments on animals, it is very soon observed that the expiratory efforts become exaggerated out of a!ll proportion to the inspiratory, and how they quickly pass into convulsions. This period lasts about a minute, during which time the pulse is increased in frequency, and the arterial blood-pressure rises. Deep slow breathing then supervenes, and the inspiratory movements are now more marked than the expi- ratory, the more yielding parts of the chest wall receding at every inspiration. The cardiac beats decrease in number, but remain forcible though the arterial pressure falls. The respiratory rhythm becomes . irregular, long pauses being followed by quick inspirations with brief intervals. The inspirations next become shallow and gasping, the acceleratory muscles of respiration being brought into active play, and at last the gasps end in a convulsive stretching of the whole body; and, with extended limbs and a straightened trunk, with the head thrown back, the mouth widely open, the face drawn and the nostrils dilated, the last breath is drawn. There are three distinguishable stages in these phenomena of asphyxia which result from a continued deficiency of air :—1. A stage of dyspnoea, characterized by an increase in the respiratory movements both of inspiration and expiration. 2. A convulsive stage, characterized by the dominance of the expiratory efforts, and culminating in general convulsions. 3. A stage of exhaus- tion, in which lingering and long-drawn inspirations gradually die out. When brought about by sudden occlusion of the windpipe, these events run through their course in from three to five minutes. The phenomena of slow asphyxia, where the supply of air is gradually diminished, are fundamentally the same, and the same stages are seen, but with their development taking place more slowly than where i there is a sudden and total deprivation of air. The heart continues to beat for some seconds after all respiratory movements have ceased, whether the asphyxia be rapidly or slowly developed. In animals, the cardiac chambers at the moment of death are all gorged with blood—the left ones as well as the right. When rigor mortis sets in, the left auricle and ventricle empty themselves ; and in ordinary autopsies in the human subject, the pulmonary artery, the right cavities of the heart, and the venae cavae are found gorged with blood. The pulmonary veins, the left cavities of the heart, and the aorta, are either empty or contain but little blood. In certain cases


[50/872 b22652516_0050.jp2]

DEATH FROM ASPHYXIA. COMA. 38 of asphyxia, the right cavities of the heart, as well as the left, have been found empty. When the access of air to the lungs is suddenly and completely cut off, the circulation of the blood is very speedily arrested; but supposing the occlusion of the air-passages to be partial or gradual, the circulation of the blood may continue for a time, and thus cause congestion of certain organs. Hence the appearances in asphyxia differ greatly. A mixed condition under the name of syncopal asphyxia has been described by some pathologists. In this, the cavities of the heart are found empty. Geo. Johnson (' Asphyxia,' 1889) states that when the chest is opened immediately after death from apnoea (asphyxia) the right cavities of the heart are distended with blood, while the left contain comparatively little blood; and he holds that the phenomena of asphyxia are characterized by two well- defined stages. In the first stage there is,systemic arterial resistance, with resulting distension of the left side of the heart. In the second stage there is pulmonary arterial resistance, with distension of the right cavities and comparative emptiness of the left. Coma (from Kw/na, a deep sleep).—Besides a due supply of pro- . perly aerated blood, the brain requires for the exercise of its functions ■ a proper quantity of blood, so that either by the sudden withdrawal \ of this fluid, or by a circulation of impure blood, these are arrested. A person thus affected falls into a state of complete insensibility (coma), so that it is impossible to rouse him. The functions of the heart and lungs are not always suddenly arrested under these circum- stances. They appear to be less dependent on the brain than the brain is upon them ; but this is rather a question of degree. A due supply of nerve-force is required for the action of the muscles, whether of the heart or of the chest; and when this is withdrawn, the heart ceases to beat, and the respiratory muscles cease to act: circulation and respiration are thus arrested by the absence of innervation. This is sometimes described as death by paralysis of the heart and lungs. The blood is neither aerated nor circulated. Sudden death from apoplexy is an illustration of death by the brain. Coma may also be a result of the introduction of certain poisons into the blood, and of fractures of the skull leading to compression of the brain or destruction , of its substance. Death beginning at the brain is, indeed, scarcely to be regarded as a mode of dying, since it may usually be resolved into either death from sudden paralysis of the respiratory centre, when death is often absolutely quiet; or the coma ends in asphyxia, when the extinction of respiration is brought about more slowly. In death by the brain, the appearances observed consist chiefly in a congested state of the cerebral membranes and substance of the brain. As before death the breathing is affected, the lungs are congested and blood accumulates in the cavities of the heart, more on the right than on the left side. The appearances described as characteristic of the different modes of death by the heart, lungs, and brain, are liable to variation by reason of the intimate relations of these organs. Thus, there may be a mixed condition of syncope and asphyxia, or of asphyxia witL cerebral congestion.


[51/872 b22652516_0051.jp2]

SUDDEN DEATH. SIGNS OR INDICATIONS OF DEATH. With regard to the interruption of the functions of the brain as a result of pressure by the effusion of blood or serum, it is to be observed that a very small effusion at the base or in the substance of the medulla oblongata is sufficient to cause death; while, generally speaking, a larger effusion is required into the membranes, ventricles, or substance of the brain, in order to produce a fatal result. In cases of chronic hydrocephalus, in which the brain has resisted the pressure of a large accumulation of serum for many years, a slight and sudden increase in the quantity at any period of hfe may lead to coma, and death. This condition may be mistaken for narcotic poisoning. All causes of death, whether from disease or violence, are referable to an effect produced primarily on the heart, the lungs, or the brain; but, as it has been elsewhere stated, death does not take place until the action of the heart has entirely ceased, the arrest of the circula- tion producing an immediate impression upon the functions of the brain and lungs. The natural causes of sudden death may be generally traced to some injury or impediment to the action of the heart, lungs, or brain. It would be foreign to the' objects of this manual to give a description of them. The violent causes are those which demand the especial attention of a medical jurist; they will be considered hereafter. In its relation to medicine and medical jurisprudence the subject of sudden death has been fully treated by Herrich and Kopp ('Der Plotzliche Tod aus inneren Ursachen,' 1848); by Devergie (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1838, 2, 145); and by Fagge (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1879, p. 343). The violent causes of death, whether sudden or protracted, which chiefly require the skill of a medical jurist for their elucidation, are poisoning, wounds, and personal injuries such as burns and scalds, as well as those forms of death which commence by the lungs, including drowning, hanging, strangulation, and suffocation; In nearly all cases, the body of the deceased is produced, and a medical opinion can be based upon a careful examination. Signs or Indications of Dhath.—The verification of death is occa- sionally a duty thrown on the medical jurist. Certain signs or indications have been pointed out as proving that death is real, and not apparent. These are taken in the order of their importance. 1. Cessation of Circulation and Respiration.—The heart is considered to be the organ in which life begins and ends—the primum vivens and ultimum moriens—the first to live and the last to die. The proof of death is the proof of the cessation of the heart's action for a certain period. The more visible indication of death is the cessation of breathing, and, in the opinion of Brodie, the entire cessation of breathing alone may be regarded as a decisive test of the extinction of life. The movements of respiration cannot be overlooked by any one who does not choose to overlook them; and the heart never con- tinues to act for more than four or five minutes after respiration has ceased. The proofs of the continued action of this organ are, however, less obvious to the unskilled observer than the movements of the


[52/872 b22652516_0052.jp2]

40 COOLING OF THE BODY. chest. The cessation of breathmg for a period of five minutes furnishes a certain proof that the person is really dead. But the skilled observer would apply the test of auscultation, and before giving an opinion should satisfy himself of the permanent cessation of the heart's action. It is impossible to admit that the heart can remain for even half an hour in a state of inaction in a human being, and then spontaneously recover its activity. 2. Cooling of the Body.—The normal temperature of the interior of the living body in health is about 98-4° F. It is hable to be increased in some diseases, and to be diminished in others. In a case of typhoid fever the blood was found to have a temperature of 113° F.; and in strychnine poisoning it is very high. The time usually assigned for the cooling of the dead human body is from fifteen to twenty hours, but it varies according to the condition of the body at the time of death, the mode of death, and the circumstances imder which it had been placed. Thus, if exposed naked to a cold atmosphere, the cooling of the body is very rapid. If it is well covered, the coohng takes place slowl3^ When death has taken place suddenly from accident, apoplexy, or acute disease, the body has been observed to maintain its temperature for a long period. Obviously, a dead body cools less rapidly as its tem- perature approaches that of the surrounding medium. Goodhart found the average rate of cooling during the first three hours after death to be at the rate of about 4° F. per hour, during the next six hours the rate was 3° per hour; and, at later periods, rather more than 1° per hour. Burman found the average rate of cooling during the first eight hours after death to be 2° F. per hour (Ed. Med. and Surg. Jour., 1&80, p. 993). 3. Cadaveric Migidity. Rigor Mortis.—In from three or four to five or six hours after death, and generally while the body is in the act of cooling, the muscles of the limbs are observed to become hard and contracted in the attitude in which the body is placed; the joints are stiff, and the trunk firm and unyielding. This peculiar condition is known under the name of cadaveric rigidity, or rigor mortis. The first effect of death from any cause is in most cases a general relaxation of the whole of the muscular system. The lower jaw drops, the eyelids lose their tension, the limbs are soft and flabby, and the joints are flexible. The muscular tissue maybe considered as passing through three stages in a dead body. 1. It is at first fiaccid, but contractile ; although, it may be remarked, that muscles contracted by living force in the act of dying do not necessarily become relaxed in death. 2. It becomes rigid and incapable of contraction. 3. It is once more relaxed, and does not regain its power and contractility. The body now passes into the stage of incipient putrefaction. The first stage defines the duration of muscular irritability; the second stage, that of cadaveric rigidity ; and the third, that of the commencement of chemical changes, or putrefaction. At a certain period after death, the heart is found rigid and firmly contracted. If examined at this time, it may appear to be in a state of spasm, and to have its walls thickened, while the cavity of the left


[53/872 b22652516_0053.jp2]

41 CADAVERIC RIGIDITY, OR RIGOR MORTIS. ventricle may be described as being much smaller than in the normal state. J. Paget has pointed out that this natural condition of the heart after death has led to pathological mistakes, the walls being described as thickened, the cavities diminished in size, and the heart itself as being in a state of concentric hypertrophy from disease. On the other hand, the perfect relaxation of the heart which follows at a later period after death has been mistaken for, and described as, a morbid flabbiness and flaccidity. Spasm and paralysis cannot be inferred to have necessarily existed during life when we discover these conditions of the heart in the recently dead body. Under the action of poisons like strychnine and those other alkaloids which cause death by convulsions, the more violent and frequent the convulsions, the sooner rigidity sets in. Whatever exhausts muscular irritability before death, appears to accelerate rigor mortis in the muscles after death. In those instances in which muscular irritabihty at the time of death is slight, either in consequence of a bad state of nutrition or of exhaustion from over-exertion, or from convulsions caused by disease or poison, it is observed that rigidity sets in and ceases soon, and putrefaction appears and progresses quickly. (Brown- Sequard, 'Proc. Roy. Soc.,' 1861, p. 204). For a similar reason it takes place at an earlier period in the very young and in the old, than in an adult in the prime of life. If we allow a proper interval to elapse after the supposed death of a person, there can be no difficulty in solving the question whether the body is really dead even before any of those changes which arise from putrefaction have manifested themselves. The circumstances on which we may rely as furnishing conclusive evidence of death are the following:—1. The absence of circulation and respiration for at least an hour, the stethoscope being employed. 2. The gradual cooling of the body approximately to the temperature of the air, the trunk remaining warm while the members are cold. 3. As the body cools, the gradual supervention of a rigid state of the muscles, successively attacking the limbs and trunk, and ultimately spreading through the whole muscular system. When these conditions are observed, the proofs of death are conclusive, and it is unnecessary to wait for any sign of putrefaction. These changes are as certainly the forerunners of putrefaction as the process of putrefaction is itself the forerunner of the entire destruction of the body. It may be safely said that there has not been a single instance of resuscitation after rigidity had once commenced in a body. During the raging of epidemics, if additional evidence be required for early burial, it might be obtained by exposing a superficial muscle to the galvanic stimulus. If the fibres do not contract, death is certain. If they do, this is no proof that the person can be restored to active life ; but further time may be allowed before the body is committed to the grave. For a full discussion of rigor mortis, see a paper by Rossbach. (Virchow's ' Arch.,' Bd. 51, p. 558). Putrefaction,—By putrefaction we are to understand those chemical


[54/872 b22652516_0054.jp2]

42 PUTREFACTION. changes which take place in dead animal matter, during which offensive gases are evolved. The ultimate effect of these changes is, after a longer or shorter period, to reduce the organic to the condition of inorganic compounds, consisting chiefly of water, ammonia, and carbonic acid. It is in the stage of transition that noxious effluvia are evolved from which the process derives its name. These consist of compounds of carbon, hydrogen, nitrogen, and sulphur. This process does not begin to manifest itself in the dead body until after the cessation of rigor mortis, and generally about the third day. It is then observed, if the body has been exposed to the atmosphere in an apartment of mean temperature (60° F.), that the limbs and trunk become supple and pliant, and have a faint odour. The skin covering the abdomen becomes of a pale greenish colour, which gradually deepens. A similar discoloration slowly makes its appearance on the chest, between the ribs, on the face, the neck, the legs, and, lastly, on the arms. The colour appears to depend on the decomposition and infiltration of the animal fluids, especially of the blood, into the skin. In the neck and limbs it is observed to be more marked in the situation of the large venous trunks; and sometimes, indeed, the course of the superficial veins is accurately traced out by greenish-blue or dusky lines, which have been mistaken for marks of violence. Gaseous pro- ducts are formed, not only in the hollow organs of the abdomen, but beneath the skin generally; so that on making an incision, the edges of the skin are rapidly forced apart or everted. The pressure of the confined gases accounts for the occasional escape of alimentary and faecal matter from the outlets—also for the escape of blood some days after death from recent wounds involving any of the large veins. The gases generated in the cavities of the head and face by putre- faction appear to meet with the greatest resistance to their escape. The features become generally swollen or bloated, one or both eyes may be protruded, the eyelids swollen and dark-coloured, the lips swollen and the tongue protruded between them, gaseous matter with fluid escaping in bubbles from the mouth and nostrils. As the skin of the face is generally Hvid, or even black, it is- impossible, under these circumstances, to identify the body. In death from drowning, when the body is afterwards exposed to a warm atmosphere, the gases of putrefaction are so copiously produced that the head appears much larger than natural, and the skin of the trunk and limbs is distended with gas, giving to the whole of the discoloured body a bloated appearance. Changes in the Viscera.—During putrefaction, various discolorations take place, first in the windpipe, then on the mucous surface of the stomach and bowels, often closely simulating the effects of disease or poison. The mucous membrane of the stomach may be found of various tints—from a refd brown, becoming of a brighter red by exposure to the air, to a deep livid purple or slate colour, and some- times black from decomposition of the blood. When the stomach is in contact with the spleen or liver, the lividity is often well marked and clearly defined through all the coats. The peritoneal or outer coat is


[55/872 b22652516_0055.jp2]

CHANGES IN THE VISCERA. 43 of a greenish hue, and the course of the superficial vessels is marked by greenish-brown or black lines. These spontaneous changes, which are the result of putrefaction, may be easily mistaken for the effects of irritant poisons. There are no rules that will always enable a medical jurist to distinguish such cases. Much must depend on the progress of putrefaction, and the period after death at which the body is examined: hence each case must be judged by the circumstances which attend it. We may presume that the redness has taken place during life, and is not a result of post-mortem changes :—1. When it is seen soon after death. 2. When it is met with in parts neither dependent nor in contact with other organs gorged with blood. 3. When it is accompanied by a considerable effusion of coagulated blood, mucus, or flakes of membrane, the result of ulceration, corrosion, or' destruction of the coats of the viscera. When the body is not inspected until long after death, it is difficult to distinguish pseudo-morbid appearances from those depending on the action of irritant poison. In a really doubtful case, it is therefore better to withhold an opinion than to express one which must be purely conjectural. Putrefaction takes place with variable rapidity. It commonly shows itself in this country about the second or third day in warm, and about the fifth or sixth day in cold weather. In some instances, however, the body has been found in an advanced state of putrefac- tion in the short period, of sixteen hours after death, and in others the process has been greatly protracted. The time of its appearance is dependent on the duration of rigor mortis, and the condition of the body at the time of death. The changes caused by putrefaction in the dead body have in some cases been mistaken for those of gangrene in the living, and a person has in consequence been wrongly charged with manslaughter. Parts which are the seat of severe injury at the time of death undergo putre- faction more rapidly than those which have not been affected by the accident. When a body has undergone putrefaction generally, the effects of gangrene in a wound may be merged in the changes caused by this p];ocess, and great care should be taken in assigning these changes to one or the other condition.. Gangrene implies the death of a part in the living body, and putrefactive changes take place in the dead part, as in the entire dead body. If changes resembhng those of gangrene are found in a wounded limb while the rest of the body is not in a putrescent state, there may be some reason for the opinion that there was gangrene during life. In this case, however, due allow- ance should be made for the more rapid decomposition of wounded parts. The best evidence will be that which shows the actual condition of the injured part in the living body. If putrefaction is advanced, the opinion of a person who has not seen the deceased while hving can be little more than a conjecture.


[56/872 b22652516_0056.jp2]

44 DEFINITION OF A POISON. POISONING. CHAPTER 4. DEFINITION OP THE TERM POISON.—MECHANICAL IRRITANTS.—INFLUENCE OF HABIT, IDIOSYNCRASY, AND DISEASE, — CLASSIFICATION.—SPECIAL CHA- RACTERS OF CORROSIVE, IRRITANT, AND NEUEOTIC POISONS. Definition.—A poison is commonly defined to be a substance which, when administered or taken in small quantity, is capable of acting deleteriously on the body: in popular language, this term is apphed only to those substances which destroy life in small doses. This popular view of the nature of a poison is too restricted for the purposes of medical jurisprudence. It would obviously exclude numerous com- pounds, the poisonous properties of which cannot be disputed—as, for example, the salts of copper, tin, zinc, lead, and antimony; these, generally speaking, act as poisons only when administered in large doses. Some substances, such as nitre, have not been observed to have a noxious action except when taken in large quantity, while arsenic acts as a poison in a small dose; but in a medico-legal view, whether a man dies from the effects of an,ounce of nitre, or two grains of arsenic, the responsibihty of the person who criminally administers the substance is the same. Each may be regarded as a poison, differ- ing from the other only in its degree of activity and in its mode of operation. The result is the same; death is caused by the substance taken, and the quantity required to destroy hfe, even if it could be always accurately determined, cannot enable us to distinguish a poisonous from a non-poisonous substance. If, then, a medical witness is asked 'What is a poison?" he must beware of adopting this popular view, or of confining the term 'poison' to a substance which is capable of operating as such in one small dose. In legal medicine, it is difScult to give such a definition of a poison as shall be entirely free from objection. Perhaps the most comprehen- sive which can be suggested is this : ' A poison is a substance which, when absorbed into the blood, is [by a direct action—Ed.] capable of seriously affecting health or of destroying life.' There are various channels by which poisons may enter the blood. Some poisons are gases or vapours: these operate rapidly through the lungs; others are liquid or solid, and these may reach the blood either through the skin or through a wound, but more commonly through the lining membrane of the stomach or bowels, as when they are taken or administered in the ordinary manner. The latter chiefly give rise to


[57/872 b22652516_0057.jp2]

45 MEDICINES AND POISONS. medico-legal investigations. Some substances act as poisons by any- one of these channels: thus arsenic is a poison whether it enters the blood through the lungs, the skin, or the stomach and bowels; but such poisons as those of the cobra, the viper, of rabies, and of glanders, appear to greatly affect the body only through a wound. When intro- duced into the stomach, some of these animal poisons have been found to be almost inert. In adopting the above definition of a poison in a medical sense, it is proper to remark that there are some substances which are regarded as poisons, although absorption into the blood does not appear to be absolutely necessary to their action. The mineral acids and alkalies belongs to this class of bodies. They are corrosive poisons: they operate injuriously by causing the destruction of living parts; and whether applied to the skin, the stomach, or (in the form of vapour) to the air-cells of the lungs, they destroy life chiefly by the local changes to which they give rise, and the inflammation which is a consequence of their action. It is not easy to define the boundary between a medicine and a poison. It is usually considered that a medicine in a large dose is a poison, and that a poison in a small dose is a medicine; but a medicine such as tartarated antimony may be easily converted into a poison by giving it in small doses at short intervals, either under states of the body not adapted to receive it, or in cases in which it exerts an injuriously depressing effect.. Some deaths have been occasioned by this wilful misuse of antimony in doses which might be described as medicinal, although, in the cases- referred to, t^he intention existed, in the secret administration of this substance, of destroying life. A person may die either from a large dose of a substance given at once, or from a number of small doses given at such intervals that the system cannot recover from the effects of one before another is administered. This remark applies to a great number of medicines which are not commonly included in a list of poisons. The retailing of poisons is by law restricted to pharmaceutical chemists, chemists and druggists, and medical men, and by the Phar- macy Act, 1868, poisons are scheduled under tSvo heads. With those placed in the first part of the schedule, a registration of the sale is obligatory; whilst those in the second part of the schedule are merely required to be labelled with the name of the substance, the word ' poison,' and the name and address of the vendor. The following are at present the scheduled poisons :—Part I.—Arsenic and its prepara- tions ; prussic acid, cyanide of potassium, all metallic cyanides and all preparations of these ]■ strychnine, its preparations and all poisonous vegetable alkaloids and their salts; aconite and its preparations; emetic tartar; corrosive sublimate ; cantharides; savin and its oil; ergot of rye and its preparations. Part II.—Oxalic acid ; chloroform ; chloral hydrate; belladonna and its preparations; essential oil of almonds, unless deprived of prussic acid; opium and all preparations of opium or of poppies; preparations of morphine, of nux vomica, of corrosive sublimate and of cantharides; white precipitate; red precipi- tate ; and vermin killers.


[58/872 b22652516_0058.jp2]

46 THE ADMINISTERING OF A POISON. In reference to the medical definition of a poison, it is necessary to observe that the law does not regard the manner in which the substance administered acts. If it is capable of destroying life or of injuring health, it is of little importance, so far as the responsibility of a prisoner is concerned, whether its action on the body is of a mechanical or chemical nature, and whether it operates fatally by absorption into the blood or not. Thus a substance which simply acts mechanically on the stomach or bowels may, if wilfully administered with intent to injure, involve a person in a criminal charge, as much as if he had administered arsenic or any of the ordinary poisons. It is, then, necessary to consider what the law strictly means by the act of poisoning. If the substance criminally administered destroys life, whatever may be its nature or mode of operation, the accused is tried on a charge of murder or manslaughter, and the duty of a medical witness consists in showing that the substance taken was the certain cause of death. If, however, death is not the consequence, then the accused may be tried for the attempt to murder by poison under the Criminal Law Consolidation Act, 1861 (24 & 25 Vict. c. 100, s. 11). The words of this statute are general, and embrace all kinds of sub- stances, whether they are popularly or professionally regarded as poisons or not. Thus it is laid down that— ' Whosoever shall administer, or cause to be administered to or taken by any person, any poison, or other destructive thing, with intent to commit murder, shall be guilty of felony.' Whether the administering be followed by any bodily injury or not, the act is still a felony, provided the intent has been to commit murder. The attempt to administer or the attempt to cause to be administered to, or to be taken by any person, any poison or other destructive thing, with the like intent, although no bodily injury be effected, is also a felony (s. 14). If any doubt formerly existed whether the external application of poison, e.g. by wounds or ulcerated surfaces, would be included in the words ' administering or taking,' they are now entirely removed by the above Act. The 22nd section specially applies to such an offence, and the 15th section provides that ' Whosoever shall, by any means other than those specified in any of the preceding sections of this Act, attempt to commit murder, shall be guilty of felony.' Under sect. 22 of this statute, in reference to attempted poisoning, some offences are comprised, which formerly escaped punishment: 'Whosoever shall unlawfully apply or administer to, or cause to be taken by, or attempt to apply or administer to, or attempt to cause to be administered to or taken by any person, any chloroform, laudanum, or other stupefying or overpowering drug, matter, or thing, with intent, in any of such cases, thereby to enable himself or an}'' other person to commit, or with intent, etc., to assist any other person in committing any indictable offence, shall be guilty of felony.' Poison is not always administered with intent to murder. On many occasions it has been mixed with food, and thus administered, with a view to injure or annoy a person. Cantharides have been thus fre- quently given, and in one instance (Nov. 1859) eight members of a


[59/872 b22652516_0059.jp2]

WHAT IS A NOXIOUS SUBSTANCE? 47 family suffered from severe symptoms of poisoning by reason of the wanton administration of this drug. In April, 1860, several members of a family suffered from severe sickness, as a result of tobacco having been put into water contained in a tea-kettle ; and tartar emetic has been in some cases dissolved in beer or other liquids as a mere frolic, without any proved or probable intention on the part of the offender to destroy life. In 1884, a man was tried at the Newington Sessions for poisoning a family by putting corrosive sublimate into a tea-kettle, but was acquitted for want of evidence. In the same year a servant- girl was convicted of poisoning her mistress's beer by means of sulphate of copper {Reg. v. Mary Baker, C. C. C, Oct. 1884), and was sentenced to fifteen months' hard labour. The case of M'-Mullen (Liverpool Aut. Ass., 1856) revealed an extensive system of poisoning in the northern counties, in which tartar emetic was the substance employed. This drug, mixed with cream of tartar, was openly sold by druggists under the name of ' quietness powders,' and the evidence estab- lished that women gave these powders to their husbands with a view to cure them of habits of drunkenness. Hitherto, when the intent to murder was not proved, the offender has escaped, although great bodily injury may have been done by the wanton or malicious act. Sections 23, 24, and 25 of 24 & 25 Vict. c. 100, provide for this omission:— ' 23. Whosoever shall unlawfully and mahciously administer to, or cause to be administered to or taken by any other person, any poison or other destructive or noxious thing, so as thereby to endanger the life of such person, or so as thereby to inflict upon such person any grievous bodily harm, shall be guilty of felony.' ' 24. Whosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously administer to, or cause to be administered to or taken by any other person, any poison or other destructive or noxious thing, with intent to injure, aggrieve, or annoy such person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanour.' ' 25. If, upon the trial of any person charged with the felony above mentioned, the jury shall not be satisfied that such person is guilty thereof, but shall be satisfied that he is guilty of the misdemeanour above mentioned, then and in every such case the jury may acquit the accused of such felony, and find him guilty of such misdemeanour.' It will be perceived that the words of the statute leave the question ' What is a poison ?' to depend upon the medical evidence adduced: and in order to include all substances of an injurious nature, although they may not be, strictly speaking, poisons, the words, ' destructive or noxiom thing,' are employed. Hence, on these occasions, a medical witness must be prepared to prove that the substance, if not a poison^ was a destructive or noxious thing. Judges have taken different views of the meaning of the word noxious, and it is well that a witness should be on his guard in dealing with this question, 'What is a noxious substance?' From a case tried in Cornwall, before Cockburn, C. J., it would appear to depend, not on the well-known nature of the substance, but on the quantity of it attempted to be administered. In Reg. V. Hennah (Cornwall Lent Ass., 1877) the prisoner was charged with administering to a woman a poison, cantharides, with intent to


[60/872 b22652516_0060.jp2]

48 MECHANICAL IRRITANTS. injure, aggrieve, and annoy—the real purpose being to excite erotic feelings. The poison was given in two figs, and a glistening appearance which they presented, owing to the shining particles of cantharides, prevented the woman from eating them. One fig was examined by a chemist and druggist, and he found it to contain from a grain to a grain and a half of cantharides in powder. This would be equivalent to from two to three grains in the two figs. The druggist, in giving evidence, said that this quantity of cantharides would be insufficient to produce any effect upon the human'system, and further stated, by misquotation of this manual, that a fatal dose would amount to twenty- four grains. It was ingeniously contended in defence that if what was administered could produce no effect', it would' not in law amount to administering a 'noxious' thing as required by the statute. This view was accepted by the Lord Chief Justice, and he directed an acquittal. He ruled that, unless the thing was noxious in the quantity administered, it cannot be said that there has been a noxious thing administered. He said, further, that there must be a distinction between a thing only noxious when given in excess, and a thing which is a recognized poison and is known to be a thing noxious and pernicious in its effect. The fallacy of this reasoning will be apparent when it is stated that cantharides is a poison recognized by law as well as in medicine; that it finds a place in the schedule of the Act for regu- lating the sale of poisons, by the side of strychnine, prussic acid, and arsenic; and further, that these substances operate as poisons or are noxious only when given in excess, i.e. beyond a medicinal dose. The court was no doubt misled on this occasion by relying upon the opinion of a chemist and druggist. The quantity of cantharides attempted to be administered was quite sufficient to cause irritation of the bladder, strangury, and other unpleasant symptoms, and this would surely come under the head of annoyance or injury to health. Maclagan reports an instance in which one grain and a half of cantharides, in three pills, caused strangury, and the substance was necessarily withdrawn. ('Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1877, i. p. 466.) Until the above judgment has been overruled, medical witnesses must look closely to the quantity of the substance administered, and duly consider whether this was such as to be likely to injure, aggrieve, or annoy a person. The quantity of a poison wilfully administered ought not to affect the culpability of the person administering it. Mechanical Irritants.—The substance administered may not be a poison in the medical signification of the term, and it may not be popularly considered such; yet, when taken, it may be noxious to health or destructive to life. We have examples of substances of this description in iron filings, powdered glass, sponge, pins, needles, and such-like bodies, which have been administered with the wilful design of injuring, and have on various occasions given rise to criminal charges. In cases of this kind, the legal guilt of a prisoner may often depend on the meanhig assigned by a medical witness to the words destructive thing. Thus, mercury might be poured down the throat of an infant, with the deliberate intention to destroy it. A question of a


[61/872 b22652516_0061.jp2]

49 INFLUENCE OF HABIT ON POISONS. purely medical nature will then arise whether mercury is a ' destructive thing' or not; and the conviction of a prisoner will probably depend on the answer. Should a difference of opinion exist, the prisoner will receive the benefit of the doubt. The injuries produced on cattle by me- chanical irritants have occasionally given rise to civil actions for damages. Influence of Hahit on Poisons.—Habit, it is well known, diminishes the effects of certain poisons: thus it is that opium, when frequently taken, loses its effect after a time, and requires to be administered in much larger doses. Indeed, confirmed opium-eaters have been enabled to take at once a quantity of the drug which would have killed them had they commenced with it in the first instance. Even infants and children, who are well known to be especially susceptible of the effects of opium, and are liable to be poisoned by small doses, may, by the influence of habit, be brought to take the drug in very large quantities. It appears that the system of drugging children with opium in the factory districts and in the fens commences as soon after birth as possible; and the dose is gradually increased until it reaches fifteen to twenty drops of laudanum at once. This has the effect of throwing the child into a lethargic stupor. Healthy children of the same age would be killed by a dose of five drops. The same influence of habit is manifested more or less in the use of tobacco, alcohol, ether, chloro- form, morphine, strychnine, and other alkaloids. Christison has re- marked that this influence is chiefly confined to poisons derived from the organic kingdom; it is so limited with regard to mineral substances that it can scarcely be said to exist, except in the case of arsenic and corrosive subhmate. As to the practice of arsenic-eating, Roscoe has published a case in which, according to information supplied to him, a Styrian peasant took in one day four grains and a half, and on the day following five grains and a half of white arsenic, crushing the mineral between his teeth and swallowing it. The day after he had swallowed the second dose, the man left the place in his usual health, and there is no further record of him. R. C. Maclagan states that he saw a Styrian peasant, set. 26, swallow between four and five grains of white arsenic in powder. In two hours some urine which he passed contained arsenic. This man suffered no ill effects; he stated that he had taken arsenic for a year and a half without any injury to his health. He took at first rather less than a grain every fortnight. In another case a man, set. 46, swallowed six grains. In three quarters of an hour it was found that arsenic was eliminated with the urine. (' Ed. Med. Jour.,' 1864, x. p. 200.) Knapp informed Maclagan that a man once took in his presence seven and a half grains of arsenic, and no injurious effects were produced. (Ibid., 1865, x. p. 669.) Habit appears to have so little influence on arsenic, under the most careful medicinal use of it in this country, that no medical practitioner has ever succeeded in causing a patient to take two grains at a dose, the smallest quantity yet known to have destroyed life. Hunt, who had had a large expe- rience in the use of this mineral, fixed the maximum dose to be given with safety at one grain.


[62/872 b22652516_0062.jp2]

INFLUENCE OF IDIOSYNCRASY. A. case reported in the same journal (1864, x. p. 116) shows the danger incurred by this practice. A man who had taken arsenic for a period of three or four years died under the usual symptoms of chronic poisoning. As far as it could be ascertained, the daily dose taken by deceased for the last five months of his life was from two to three grains. From the beginning of the practice he had suffered from symptoms of poisoning with arsenic, gradually assuming the form of arsenical cachexia; but he referred the symptoms to other causes, and concealed the practice from his friends. He never became habituated to the poison. This is a result which may be generally expected. If the exceptional cases observed in Styria are supposed to prove that arsenic may be taken in large doses with impunity, they would lead to error. Such cases have no practical bearing in legal medicine. If the practice of arsenic-eating produces no symptoms, then no question of poisoning can arise. If, as in the above case, it does produce symptoms, then the case would fall within the range of ordinary experience. The impunity of the Styrians, in the habitual use of arsenic, may be occasionally quoted to explain the detection of the poison in a dead body or a motive for its puj-chase ; but no scientific witness who has seen anything of the operation of arsenic can allow these statements to influence his opinion of its ordinary effects on human beings. Arsenic-eating attracted much attention in a recent trial {R2.g v. MaybricJc, Liverpool Ass., July, 1889). The only form in which the question of habit can be seriously raised in medical jurisprudence is this: whether, while the more prominent effects of a poison are thereby diminished, the insidious effects on the constitution are at the same time counteracted. The answer is of some importance in relation to the subject of life-insurance; for the conceal- ment of the practice of opium-eating by persons whose lives were insured, has given rise to actions, in which medical evidence on this subject was rendered necessary. As a general principle, we must admit that habit cannot altogether counteract the insidious effects of poisons; and that the practice of taking them is liable to give rise to disease or to impair the constitution. Influence of Idiosyncrasy.—Idiosyncrasy differs from habit: it does not, like this, diminish the effect of a poison; for it is not commonly found that any particular state of body is a safeguard against the effects of these powerful agents. Some persons are observed to be much more affected than others by certain poisons; thus, opium, arsenic, mercury, lead, antimony, and iodide of potassium are substances of this description, and this difference in their effects is ascribed to idiosyncrasy. Christison mentions a remarkable instance, in which a gentleman, unaccustomed to the use of opium, took nearly an ounce of laudanum without any effect. This form of idiosyncrasy is very rare. Certain substances generally reputed harmless, and, indeed, used as articles of food, are observed to affect some persons like poisons. This is the case with pork, certain kinds of shell-fish, mushrooms, onions, and ginger. There may be nothing poisonous in the food itself; but it acts as a poison to particular persons—whether from its


[63/872 b22652516_0063.jp2]

51 INFLUENCE OF DISEASE. being in these cases a poison per se, or rendered so by changes during the process of digestion, it is difficult to say. The subject of idiosyn- crasy is of importance in a medico-legal view when symptoms resem- bling those of poisoning follow a meal consisting of a particular kind of food. In such a case, without a knowledge of this peculiar con- dition, we might hastily attribute to poison effects which were really due to another cause. It would appear that in some instances idiosyn- crasy may be acquired—i.e. a person who, at one period of his life, had been in the habit of partaking of a particular kind of food without injury, may find at another period that it will disagree with him. When pork has been disused as an article of dietary for many years, it cannot always be resumed with impunity. In cases in which the powers of life have become enfeebled by age, the susceptibility of the system to poisons is increased; thus aged persons may be killed by comparatively small doses of arsenic and opium. In 1883, the editor found that an aged woman died narcotised after taking an opiate con- taining less than one grain of opium—a dose which on previous occa- sions she had occasionally taken with impunity. Cases of acquired idiosyncrasy are very rare: it appears to be, if we may so apply the term, a congenital condition. There are, however, certain diseases which seem to confer a power of supporting large and even poisonous doses of some substances. Very large doses of opium have been taken without producing dangerous symptoms by persons labouring under tetanus and hydrophobia. This condition is called tolerance. It has been witnessed in diseases of the lungs in reference to the use of anti- monial medicines. Influence of Disease.—A diseased state of the body may render a person comparatively insusceptible to the action of certain poisons, while in other instances it may increase their action and render them fatal in small doses. In dysentery and in tetanus a person may take,, without being materially affected, a quantity of opium sufficient to kill an adult in average health. In mania, cholera, hysteria, and dehrium tremens, large doses of opium may be borne with comparative impunity. In a case of hemiplegia, a woman, set. 29, took for six days three grains of strychnine daily without injurious consequences—the dose having been gradually raised (' Gaz. Med.,' Mai, 1845); while one grain of strychnine is commonly regarded as a fatal dose to a healthy adult. In a case of tetanus, Dupuytren gave more than two ounces of opium at a dose (60 grammes) without serious consequences. (Flandin, ' Traite des Poisons,' vol. 1, p. 231.) It has also been remarked that persons affected with tetanus are not easily salivated by mercury. The morbid state appears to create the power of resisting the ordinary effects of poisons. The effect of certain diseases of the nervous system, as well as of habit, either in retarding the appearance of symptoms, or in blunting the operation of a poison, it is not difficult to appreciate; they are cases which can present no practical' difficulty to a medical jurist. On the other hand, in certain diseased states, there may be an increased susceptibiHty of the action of poison. Thus, in those persons who have a predisposition to apoplexy, a small dose of opium may act


[64/872 b22652516_0064.jp2]

CLASSIFICATION OF POISONS. IRRITANTS. 52 more quickly, and prove fatal. In a person labouring under inflamma- tion of the stomach or bowels, there would be an increased suscepti- bility of the effects of arsenic, antimony, and other irritants. In debility from any cause these mineral substances would also act injuriously even in ordinary doses. Antimony is a most powerful depressant, and might, by its effect on the heart, cause sudden death by syncope. The influence of disease in increasing the operation of poison has been noticed in cases of diseased kidneys (granular degeneration), in which small doses of mercury have produced severe salivation, leading to exhaustion and death. In diseases of the lungs affecting aged persons, opium in medicinal doses has been observed to exert a poisonous action. The effect of the drug appears to be intensified by the disease. This observation applies equally to morphine. A fatty condition of the muscular tissue, leading to great feebleness of the hearfs action, appears to be highly favourable to death by syncope under the use of chloro- form. A imowledge of these facts is of importance in reference to charges of malapraxis when death has arisen from ordinary or extra- ordinary doses of medicines administered to persons labouring under disease. In such cases, another mode of treatment should be substi- tuted, or a smaller dose than usual given, and its effects carefully watched. In some instances, however, full and large doses of powerful drugs have been recklessly given, and when a fatal result has followed, there has been a strong disposition to refer death to the supposed disease, of which, however, sometimes no trace could be found in the body. Classification of Poisons.—Poisons may be divided into two classes, according to their mode of action on the system; namely. Irritants and Neurotics, as the special action of the latter is to affect directly one or more parts of the nervous system. No quite satisfactory classification has, however, been hitherto proposed. Irritants.—The irritants are possessed of these common characters. When taken in ordinary doses, they occasion speedily violent vomiting and purging. The symptoms are either accompanied or followed by pain in the stomach and bowels. The peculiar effects of the poison are manifested chiefly on these organs, which, as their name implies, they irritate and inflame. Many substances belonging to this class of poisons possess corrosive propertie s ; such as the strong mineral acids, caustic alkahes, bromine, corrosive sublimate, and others. These, in the act of swallowing, are commonly accompanied with an acrid or burning taste, extending from the mouth down the gullet to the stomach. Some irritants do not possess any corrosive action—of which we have examples in white arsenic, the poisonous salts of barium, carbonate of lead, and cantharides: these are often called pure irritants. They exert no destructive chemical action on the tissues with which they come in contact; they simply irritate and inflame them. Difference between Corrosive and Irritant Poisons.—As a result of the action of corrosive poisons, symptoms are commonly manifested immediately, because mere contact produces the destruction of a part.


[65/872 b22652516_0065.jp2]

53 NEUROTIC POISONS. In the action of the purely irritant poisons, the symptoms are generally more slowly manifested, rarely showing themselves until at least half an hour has elapsed from the time of swallowing the substance. Of course, there are exceptions to this remark; for sometimes irritants act speedily, though rarely with the rapidity of corrosive poisons. It is important in a practical view to ascertain whether, in an unknown case, the poison which a person requiring immediate treatment may have swallowed, is irritant or corrosive. This may be commonly determined by a knowledge of the time at which the symptoms appeared after the suspected substance was taken. We may thus often easily distinguish between a case of poisoning from arsenic and one from corrosive sublimate. There is also another point which may be noticed. As the corrosive substance exerts a local chemical action, an examination of the mouth and throat may enable us in some cases to solve the question. It has alread}^ been stated that there are many irritant poisons which have no corrosive properties, but every corrosive may act as an irritant. Thus the action of corrosive sublimate is that of an irritant poison, as, while it destroys some parts of the coats of the stomach and intestines, it irritates and inflames others. So again most corrosive poisons may lose their corrosive properties by dilution with water, and they then act simply as irritants. This is the case with the mineral acids and bromine. In some instances it is not easy to say whether an irri- tant poison possesses corrosive properties or not. Thus oxalic acid acts immediately, and blanches and softens the mucous membrane of the mouth and throat, but it is comparatively rare to meet with any decided marks of chemical corrosion produced by it in the stomach or viscera. Irritant poisons, for the most part, belong to the mineral kingdom ; and they may be divided into the Non-Metallic and Metallic Irritants. There are a few derived from the animal and vegetable kingdoms; but these, if we except cantharides, are not often employed criminally. Some of the gases likewise belong to the class of irritant poisons. Neueotics.—Neurotic poisons act upon the nervous system. Either immediately or some time after the poison has been swallowed, the patient suflers from headache, giddiness, numbness, paralysis, stupor, or convulsions. They have not an acrid burning taste like the corrosive irritants; and they rarely give rise to purging. When vomiting or purging follow the ingestion of the poison into the stomach, the effects may be generally ascribed either to the form or quantity in which it has been taken, and the mechanical effect on the stomach thereby produced, or to the poison being combined with some irritating substance. The pure narcotics, or cerebral poisons, are not found to irritate or inflame the stomach and bowels. Notwithstanding the well-defined boundary thus apparently exist- ing between these classes of poisons, it must not be supposed that the substances arranged in each class always act in the manner indicated. Some irritants have been observed to aft'ect the brain or the spinal marrow, and this may be either a primary or secondary consequence


[66/872 b22652516_0066.jp2]

EVIDENCE OF POISONING IN THE LIVING. 54 of their action. Arsenic and oxalic acid, although classed as irritants, have in some instances given rise to symptoms closely resembling those of narcotic poisoning; namely, coma, paralysis, and tetanic con- vulsions. In a case of poisoning by arsenic, which occurred to More- head, the symptoms of narcotism were so strongly marked that it was beheved at first the man had taken a narcotic. (' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 43, p. 1055.) A case has been met with of poisoning by arsenic in which there was paralysis of the limbs, with an entire absence of purging during the eight days that the deceased survived. On the other hand, in a case of poisoning by a large dose of opium, there was an absence of the usual symptoms of cerebral disturbance, and the pre- sence of others resembling those of irritant poisoning—namely, pain and vomiting. Thus, then, we must not allow ourselves to be mis- led by the idea that the symptoms are always clearly indicative of the kind of poison taken. The narcotic or cerebral poisons belong mostly to the vegetable kingdom. Some of the poisonous gases possess a narcotic action- Some poisons have a complex action. They are chiefly derived from the vegetable kingdom. At variable periods after they have been swallowed, they give rise to vomiting and purging, like irritants; and sooner or later produce stupor, coma, paralysis, and convulsions, owing to their effects on the brain and spinal marrow. In the state of vegetables, as leaves, seeds, or roots, they possess the property, like irritants, of irritating and inflaming the stomach and bowels. As familiar examples we may point to nux vomica, aconite, hemlock, and poisonous mushrooms. These poisons are very numerous, em- bracing a large variety of well-known vegetable substances; but they rarely form a subject of difficulty to a medical practitioner. The fact of the symptoms occurring after a meal at which some suspicious vege- tables may have been eaten, coupled with the nature of the symptoms themselves, will commonly indicate the class to which the poison belongs. Some of these poisons have a hot acrid taste ; others, like aconite, produce a sense of numbness or tingling; while others again have an intensely bitter taste, as nux vomica, strychnine, veratrine, and picro- toxin. Strychnine may be regarded as a pure spinal poison. In the description of poisons no systematic classification can be consistently followed. CHAPTER 5. EVIDENCE OF POISONING IN THE LIVING BODY.—SYMPTOMS CONNECTED WITH FOOD OR MEDICINE.—SEVERAL PERSONS ATTACKED SIMULTANEOUSLY. —EVIDENCE FROM THE DETECTION OF POISON IN THE FOOD. We now proceed to consider the evidence of poisoning in the living body. To the practitioner the diagnosis of a case of poisoning is of great.importance, as, by mistaking the symptoms produced by a poison


[67/872 b22652516_0067.jp2]

SUDDEN SYMPTOMS. 55 from those arising from natural disease, he may omit to employ the proper remedial measures, and thus lead to the death of the patient. To a medical jurist a correct knowledge of the symptoms furnishes the chief evidence of poisoning, in those cases in which persons are charged with the malicious and unlawful administration of poison. The symptoms produced during life constitute also an important part of the evidence in those instances in which a poison proves fatal. At present, however, we will suppose the case to be that poison has been taken and the patient survives. Most toxicological writers have laid down certain characters whereby it is said symptoms of poisoning may be dis- tinguished from those of disease. 1. In poisoning^ the symptoms appear suddenly, while the individual is in health.—It is the common character of most poisons, when taken in the large doses in which they are usually administered with criminal intent, to produce serious symptoms, either immediately or within a very short period after they have been swallowed. Their operation, under such circumstances, cannot be suspended, and the symptoms are then manifested after an indefinite interval; although the contrary was formerly a matter of universal belief, and gave rise to many absurd accounts of what was termed slow poisoning. The symptoms of poisoning by nicotine, prussic acid, oxalic acid, or the salts of strychnine, appear immediately, or generally within a very few minutes after the poison has been swallowed. In an exceptional case, in which the dose of prussic acid was small, and insufficient to produce death, the poison was supposed by the patient not to have begun to act until after the lapse of fifteen minutes. (' Ed. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' vol. 59, p. 72.) The symptoms caused by arsenic and other irritants, and, indeed, by poisons generally, are commonly mani- fested in from half an hour to an hour. It is rare that the appearance of symptoms is protracted for two hours, except under certain peculiar states of the system. It is said that some neurotic poisons, such as the poisonous mushrooms, may remain in the stomach twelve or twenty-four hours without giving rise to symptoms ; and this is also affirmed to be the case with some animal irritants, such as decayed meat; but with regard to mushrooms, it has been shown by Peddie that they have produced symptoms in half an hour ; and a case fell under the author's own observation in which the symptoms from noxious animal food came on within as short a time after the meal as is commonly observed in irritant poisoning by mineral substances. In some cases of poison- ing by phosphorus, no obvious symptoms have occurred until after the lapse of some days. 2. Symptoms appear during a state of health.—Symptoms of poisoning may manifest themselves in a person while in a state of perfect health, without any apparent cause. This rule is, of course, open to numerous exceptions, because the person on whose life an attempt has been made may be actually labouring under disease ; and under these cir- cumstances, the symptoms may be so obscure as often to disarm all suspicion. When poison is secretly given in medicine, a practitioner is very liable to be deceived, especially if the disease under which the


[68/872 b22652516_0068.jp2]

56 EVIDENCE OF POISONING FROM SYMPTOMS. person is labouring is of an acute nature, and is attended with symptoms of disorder in the ahmentary canal. Several cases of poisoning have occurred in which arsenic was criminally substituted for medicine, and given to the persons while labouring under a disorder of the bowels. We are, however, justified in sajdng, with respect to this character of poisoning, that when, in a previously healthy person, violent vomiting and purging occur suddenly and without any assignable cause, such as disease, indiscretion in diet, or pregnancy, to account for them, there is reason to suspect that irritant poison has been taken. When the patient is already labouring under disease, we must be especially watchful of the occurrence of any sudden change in the character or violence of the symptoms, unless such change can be easily accounted for on well-known medical principles. In most cases of criminal poisoning we meet with alarming symptoms without anj'' obvious or sufficient natural causes to explain them. The practitioner will, of course, be aware that there are certain diseases which are liable to occur suddenly in healthy people, the exact cause of which may not at first sight be apparent; therefore this criterion is only one out of many on which a medical opinion should be founded. 3. In poisoning the symptoms appear soon after a meal, or soon after some kind of food or medicine has been taken.—This is by far the most important character of poisoning in the living body. It has been already stated that most poisons begin to operate within about an hour after they have been swallowed ; and although there are a few excep- tions to this remark, yet they occur under circumstances easily to be appreciated by a practitioner. Thus, then, it follows that, supposing the symptoms under which a person is labouring to depend on poison, the substance has most probably been swallowed, either in food or medicine, from half an hour to an hour previously. It must be observed, however, that cases may occur in which the poison has not been introduced by the mouth. Oil of vitriol and other corrosive liquids have been thrown up the rectum in enemata, and have thus caused death; the external application of arsenic, corrosive sublimate, and cantharides to ulcerated surfaces has destroyed life. In one case arsenic was introduced into the vagina of a female, and she died in five days under all the symptoms of arsenical poisoning. (Schneider,' Ann. der Ges. Staatsarzneikunde,' i. 229.) Such cases are rare, but, never- theless, the certainty that they have occurred, where their occurrence could hardly have been anticipated, shows that in a suspicious case a medical man must not deny the fact of poisoning merely because it may be proved that the person could not have taken the poison in the usual way, by the mouth. Again, persons may be destroyed by the vapours of ether, chloroform, prussic acid, or other powerful volatile poisons, introduced into the body through the lungs. Such a mode of suicide, or murder, might disarm suspicion, from the fact of no noxious material being found in the stomach. Let us suppose, however, the circumstances to have been such that these secret means of destruction could not have been resorted to, and that the poison is one of those most commonly selected by a murderer,


[69/872 b22652516_0069.jp2]

EVIDENCE OF POISONING FROM SYMPTOMS. 57 such as white arsenic, tartar emetic, oxalic acid, strychnine, or corrosive sublimate; then we may expect that this character of poisoning will be made evident to us, and that something must have been swallowed by the patient shortly before the alarming symptoms appeared. By observations attentively made, it may be in our power to connect the appearance of the symptoms with the use of a particular article of food, and thus indirectly lead to the detection of a criminal. Supposing that many hours have passed since food or medicine was taken by the patient, without any effect ensuing—it is probable that the symptoms may be due to natural causes and not to poison. When symptoms resembling those of poisoning speedily follow the ingestion of food or medicine, there is, however, reasonable ground for suspicion; but caution should be observed in drawing inferences, since the most extra- ordinary coincidences sometimes present themselves. In the case of Sir Theodosius Boughton, who was poisoned by his brother-in-law Donellan in 1781, the fact of alarming symptoms coming on in two minutes after the deceased had swallowed what was supposed to be ,a simple medicinal draught, was a most important part of the evidence against the prisoner. There is no doubt that laurel-water had been substituted for the medicine by the prisoner, and that this had caused the symptoms which preceded death. The practice of substituting poisonous mixtures for medicinal draughts or powders is by no means imusual, although it might be supposed to indicate a degree of refine- ment and knowledge not commonly to be found among criminals. Medical practitioners are thus apt to be imposed upon, and the follow- ing case will serve as a caution. An apothecary prepared a draught, into which another person put poison, intending thereby to destroy the life of a patient for whom the medicine was prescribed. The patient, not liking the taste of the draught, and thinking there was something suspicious about it, sent it back to the apothecary, who, knowing the ingredients of which he had composed it, and wishing to prove to his patient that he had done nothing wrong, drank it himself, and died from its effects. He was thus the unconscious agent of his own death ; and although the draught was intended for another, the party who poisoned it was held guilty ot murder. This case contains a warning to medical witnesses. On trials for poisoning, when the poison is conveyed through medicine, a medical witness has offered to swallow his own draught in a court of law, in order to furnish a con- vincing practical illustration of the innocence of the medicine. It need hardly be observed that an exhibition of this kind is never required of a witness. If any doubt be raised of the innocent properties of a draught or powder, an analysis of its contents will be far more satisfactory as evidence, and be attended with no risk to the prac- titioner. On the other hand, the occurrence of symptoms resembling those produced by poisoning, soon after food or medicine has been taken, may be a pure coincidence. In such a case, poison is always suspected by the vulgar; and it will be the duty of a medical jurist to guard against the encouragement of such a suspicion, until he has strong


[70/872 b22652516_0070.jp2]

EVIDENCE OF POISONING FROM SYMPTOMS. 58 grounds to believe it to be well founded. No public retractation or apology can ever make amends for the injury which may in this way be inflicted on the character of another; for those who hear the accusa- tion may never hear the defence. In all such cases, a practitioner may entertain a suspicion; but, until confirmed by facts, he should avoid expressing it or giving it publicity. When death is not a consequence, it is difficult to clear up such cases except by the aid of a chemical analysis; but this, as we know, is not always appHcable. If death ensues, the real cause is usually apparent, and a suspicion of poisoning is thus often removed by an examination of the body. Cases are reported in which persons have died suddenly after a meal, and the cause of death has been traced to obstruction of the air-passages by food. 4. In poisoning^ when several partake at the same time of the same food or medicine {mixed with poison) all suffer from similar symp- toms.—This character of poisoning, when it exists, furnishes good evidence of the fact. Thus, supposing that after a meal made by several persons from the same dish, only one suffers, the suspicion of poison is considerably weakened. The poisoned article of food may be detected by observing whether they who suffer under any symptoms of poisoning have partaken of one particular solid or liquid in common. In a case of accidental poisoning at a dinner-party, a medical man who was present observed that those who suffered had taken port wine only; the contents of the bottle were examined, and found to be a saturated solution of arsenic in wine. In general, considerable reliance may be placed upon this character, because it is improbable that any common cause of disease should sud- denly attack with violent symptoms of a similar character many healthy persons at the same time, and within a short period after having partaken of food together. We must beware of supposing that, when poison is really present, all will be attacked with precisely similar symptoms; because there are many circumstances which may modify their nature and progress. In general that person who has partaken most freely of the poisoned dish will suffer most severely; but even this does not always follow. There is a well-known case, recorded by Bonnet, where, among several persons who partook of a dish poisoned with arsenic, they who had eaten little and did not vomit, speedily died; while others who had partaken largely of the dish, and had in consequence vomited freely, recovered. It was just now remarked that there is no disease resembhng poisoning which is likely to attack several healthy persons at the same time and in the same manner. This is undoubtedly true as a general rule, but the following case will show that mistakes may occasion- ally arise even under these circumstances. It occurred in London, during the prevalence of cholera in the year 1832. Four of the mem- bers of a family, living in a state of great domestic unhappiness, sat down to dinner in apparently good health ; some time after the meal, the father, mother, and daughter were suddenly seized with violent vomiting and purging. The evacuations were tinged with blood, while


[71/872 b22652516_0071.jp2]

DISCOVERY OF POISON IN FOOD. 59 the blueness of the skin, observed in cases of cholera, was absent. Two of these persons died. The son, who was known to have borne ill will against his father and mother, and who suffered no symptoms on this occasion, was accused of having poisoned them. At the inquest, however, it was clearly shown by the medical attendant that the de- ceased persons had really died of cholera, and there was no reason to suspect that any poison had been administered to them. In this instance it will be perceived that symptoms resembhng those of irritant poison appeared suddenly in several individuals in perfect health, and shortly after a meal. We hereby learn that the utility of any rules for investigating cases of poisoning depends entirely on the judgment and discretion with which they are applied to particular cases. It is well to bear in mind, in conducting these inquiries, that symp- toms resembling those produced by irritant poison may be sometimes traced to food. Meat rendered unwholesome by disease, decay, or micro-organisms, pork, bacon, sausages, cheese and bread, as well as mussels and other kinds of shell-fish, may give rise to sj^mptoms of poisoning, and even cause death. Such cases may be regarded as poisoning by animal or vegetable irritants. All the characters above described, as indicative of poisoning, may be observed, and the difficulty of forming an opinion is often increased by the fact that some of the persons attacked may have previously partaken of the same kind of food without inconvenience. 5. The discovery of the poison in the food taken or in the matters vomited.—One of the strongest proofs of poisoning in the hving subject is the detection of poison by chemical analysis; or, if of a vegetable nature, by a microscopical examination, either in the food taken by the person labouring under its effects, and the matters vomited, or in the urine. The evidence is, of course, more satisfactory when the poison is detected in the matters vomited or in the urine, than in the food, because this will show that it has really been taken, and it will readily account for the symptoms. If the vomited matters have been thrown away, we must examine the food of which the patient may have partaken. Should the results in both cases be negative, and no trace of poison be found in the urine, it is probable that the symptoms were due to disease. In investigating a case of poisoning in a living subject, a medical jurist must remember that poisoning is sometimes feigned^ and at others imfuted. It is easy for an artful person to put poison into food, as well as to introduce it into the matters vomited or discharged from the bowels, and to accuse another of having administered it. There are few of these accusers who go so far as to swallow poison under such circumstances, as there is a great dread of poisonous substances among this class of criminals; and it will be at once apparent that it would require a person well versed in toxicology to feign such a series of symptoms as would impose upon a practitioner at all acquainted with the subject. In short, the difficulty reduces itself to this : What inference can be drawn from the detection of poison in food? All that a medical man can say is, whether poison is or is not present


[72/872 b22652516_0072.jp2]

6o SUSPECTED POISONING. SYMPTOMS. in a particular article of food: he must leave it to the authorities of the law to develop the alleged attempt at administration. If the poison has been actually administered or taken, then we should expect to find that the person had suffered from the usual symptoms. The absence of these symptoms would be a strong fact against the alleged administration. The detection of poison in the matters vomited affords no decisive proof that it has been swallowed, except under two circumstances: 1. When the accuser has previously laboured under the usual symptoms of poisoning, in which case there will be no feign- ing, and the question of imputation is a matter to be established by general evidence. 2. When the matters are actually vomited into a clean vessel in the presence of the medical attendant himself, or of some person on whose testimony perfect reliance can be placed. The de- tection of absorbed poison in the urine, passed in the presence of the medical attendant, furnishes a clear proof that poison has been taken, that it has passed into the blood, and has been subsequently eliminated. When a medical man is called to a case of suspected poisoning, it is necessary that he should know to what points he ought to give his attention. Every effort should be made by him to save life when the individual is living ; but, while engaged in one duty, it is also in his power to perform another, supposing the case to be one of suspected criminal poisoning, namely, to note down any circum- stances which may tend to detect the perpetrator of a crime. There is no person so well fitted to observe these points as a medical man; but it unfortunately happens that many facts important as evidence are often overlooked. The necessity for observing and recording them is not, perhaps, generally known. A medical man should not make himself officious on such occasions, but he would be unmindful of his duty as a member of society if he did not aid the cause of justice by extending his scientific knowledge to the detection of crime. It is much to the credit of the medical profession that the crime of murder by poisoning—a form of death from which no caution or foresight can protect a person—is so frequently brought to light by the announcement of suspicious facts of a medical nature to magistrates and coroners. The following are the principal points which demand the attention of a medical jurist in all cases of suspected poisoning:—1. The time of the occurrence of symptoms, and their nature. 2. The exact period at which they were observed to take place after a meal, or after food or medicine had been taken. 3. The order of their occurrence. 4. Whether there was any remission or intermission in their progress; or, whether they continued to become more and more aggravated until death. 5. Whether the patient had laboured under any previous illness. 6. Whether the symptoms were observed to recur more violently after a particular meal, or after any particular kind of food or medicine. 7. Whether the patient has vomited. The vomited matters, if any (especially those ^/irst ejected), should be procured; their odour, colour, and acid or alkaline reaction noted, as well as their quantity. 8. If none be procurable, and the vomiting has taken place


[73/872 b22652516_0073.jp2]

EVIDENCE OF POISONINa IN THE DEAD BODY. 61 on the dress, furniture, or floor of a room, then a portion of the clothing, sheet, or carpet may be cut out and reserved for analysis ; if the vomiting has occurred on a deal floor, a portion of the wood may be scraped or cut out; or if on a stone pavement, then a clean sponge soaked in water may be used to remove any traces of the substance. The vessel in which vomited matters have been contained will often furnish valuable evidence, since heavy mineral poisons fall to the bottom, or adhere to the sides. 9. Endeavour to ascertain the probable nature of the food or medicine last taken, and the exact time at which it was taken. 10. Ascertain the nature of all the different articles of food used at a meal. 11. Any suspected articles of food, as well as the vomited matters, should be sealed up as soon as possible in clean glass vessels, labelled (the labels being attached by seals), and reserved for analysis. 12. Note down, in their own words, all explanations voluntarily made by persons present, or who are sup- posed to be concerned in the suspected poisoning. 13. Note whether more than one person partook of the food or medicine; and if so, whether all these persons were affected, and how ? 14. Note whether the same kind of food or medicine had been taken before or since by the patient or other persons without ill effects following. CHAPTER 6. EVIDENCE OF POISONING IN THE DEAD BODY.—PERIOD AT WHICH POISONS PROVE FATAL,—CHRONIC POISONING.—APPEARANCES PRODUCED BY THE DIFFERENT CLASSES OF POISONS.—REDNESS OF THE MUCOUS MEMBRANE MISTAKEN FOR INFLAMMATION.—ULCERATION AND CORROSION.—SOFTEN- ING.—PERFORATION OF THE STOMACH FROM POISON AND DISEASE. Supposing that the person is dead, and we are required to determine whether the case is one of poisoning or not, we must, in the first instance, endeavour to ascertain all the particulars which have been considered in the last chapter as indicative of poisoning in the living body. Should the deceased have died from poison, the circumstances of the attack, and the symptoms preceding death, ought to correspond with the characters already described; and in these investigations it is well to bear in mind the following rule : there is no one symptom or pathological condition which is pecuhar to poisoning; but at the same time there is probably no disease which presents all those characters which are met with in an actual case of poisoning. The points which require to be specially noticed under these circumstances in the living, are described at pp. 6 and 7, ante. The additional evidence to be derived from the death of a person may be considered under the following heads:— 1. The tivie at which death fakes place after the first occurrence of symptoms.—This question requires examination, because the more common poisons, when taken in fatal doses, generally cause death


[74/872 b22652516_0074.jp2]

62 TIME WITHIN WHICH POISONS PROVE FATAL. within definite periods of time. By an attention to this point we may? in some instances, be enabled to negative a charge of poisoning, and in others to form an opinion of the kind of poison which has been taken. In a court of law, a medical practitioner is often required to state the usual period of time within which poisons prove fatal. It is to be observed that not only do poisons differ from each other in this respect, but the same substance, according to the form or quantity in which it has been taken, may differ in the rapidity of its action. A large dose of the ordinary solution of prussic acid, i.e. from half an ounce to an ounce, may destroy life in less than two minutes. In ordinary cases of poisoning by this substance a person dies, i.e. all signs of life have commonly ceased, in from ten to twenty minutes; and if he survives half an hour, there is some hope of recovery. In the cases of seven epileptics, accidentally poisoned by a similar dose of this acid in one of the Parisian hospitals, the first died in about twenty minutes; the seventh survived three quarters of an hour. Oxalic acid, one of the most energetic of the common poisons, when taken in a dose of from half an ounce to an ounce, may destroy life in from ten minutes to an hour; but if the poison is not completely dissolved when swallowed, it is a longer time in proving fatal. The strong mineral acids, in poisonous doses, destroy life in about eighteen or twenty-four hours. White arsenic operates fatally in from eight hours to three or four days. It has, however, in more than one instance, killed a person in two hours. Opium, either as a solid or in the form of laudanum, commonly proves fatal in from six to twelve hours; but it has been known, in several instances, to destroy life in less than three hours: they who survive the effects of this poison for twelve hours are considered to have a fair chance of recovery. This must be under- stood to be merely a statement of the average results, as nearly as we are warranted in giving an opinion; but the medical jurist will, of course, be aware that the fatal period may be protracted or shortened, according to all those circumstances which have been elsewhere stated to affect the action of poisons. There are various forms which this question may assume. It may be said that the death of a person, alleged to have taken poison, has occurred either too rapidly or too slowly to justify a suspicion of poisoning. The following case will serve as an illustration: A woman was tried and convicted {Reg. v. Russell^ Lewes Sum. Ass., 1826) of the murder of her husband by arsenic. The poison was detected in the stomach; but the fact of poisoning was disputed by some medical witnesses, for this, among other reasons, that the deceased had died three hours after the only meal at which the poison could have been administered to him. Authorities were cited to show that, according to their experience, they had never known a case of poison- ing by arsenic to have proved fatal in less than seven hours. This may be admitted; but, at the same time, there was sufficient authority on the other side to establish that some cases had actually proved fatal in three or four hours. So far as this objection was concerned, the prisoner was properly convicted. In reference to the medical question


[75/872 b22652516_0075.jp2]

63 SLOW OR CHRONIC POISONING. raised at this trial, it may be observed that two distinct cases have since occurred in which the persons died certainly within two hours after taking arsenic ; and several instances have been reported in which death has taken place in from three to four hours after the administra- tion of this poison. It seems extraordinary that any attempt should have been made by a professional man to negative a charge of criminal poisoning upon so weak a ground as this; but this opinion was ex- pressed many years ago, when the facts connected with poisoning were but little known. It is obvious that there is nothing, so far as we know, to prevent arsenic from destroying life in an hour, or even within a shorter period. These matters can be settled only by a careful observation of numerous cases, and not by any a priori reasoning, or by a limited individual experience. In all instances of sudden death there is generally a strong tendency on the part of the public to suspect poisoning. They never can be brought to consider that persons may die a natural death suddenly, as well as slowly; or, as we shall presently see, that death may really take place slowly, and yet be due to poison. This prejudice continu- ally gives rise to the most unfounded suspicions of poisoning, and, at the same time, leads to cases of chronic or slow poisoning being frequently mistaken for natural disease. One of the means recom- mended for distinguishing narcotic poisoning from apoplexy or disease of the heart, is the difference in the rapidity with which death takes place. Thus, apoplexy or disease of the heart may prove fatal either instantly or within an hour. The only poisons likely to operate with such fatal rapidity are prussic, carbolic, and oxalic acids, strychnine, and nicotine. Poisoning by opium is commonly protracted for five or six hours. This poison has never been known to destroy life instanta- neously, or within a few minutes. Thus, then, it may happen that death will occur with such rapidity as to render it impossible, under the circumstances, to attribute it to narcotic poison. Chronic Poisoning.—When a poison destroys hfe rapidly, it is called a case of acute poisoning, to distinguish it from the chronic form, i.e. in which death takes place slowly. Chronic poisoning is a subject which has frequently required medico-legal investigation. Most poisons, when their effects are not rapidly manifested, owing either to the smallness of the dose or to timely treatment, are capable of slowly undermining the powers of hfe, and killing the patient by producing emaciation and exhaustion. This is sometimes observed in the action of arsenic, corrosive sublimate, and tartarated antimony; but it has been remarked also in cases of poisoning by the mineral acids and caustic alkahes. Death is here an indirect consequence: in poisoning by the acids or alkahes, either stricture of the gullet is induced, or the lining membrane of the stomach is destroyed, and the process of digestion impaired—a condition which leads to exhaustion and death. The time at which these indirect effects may prove fatal is, of course, liable to vary. A person has been known to die from a stricture of the gullet, brought on by sulphuric acid, eleven months after the poison was swallowed; and there is no reason to doubt that instances may


[76/872 b22652516_0076.jp2]

64 EVIDENCE FROM POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES. occur of a still more protracted nature. In cases of chronic poisoning, there is sometimes great difficulty in assigning death exclusively to the original action of the poison, since the habits of life of the person, a tendency to disease, and other circumstances, may have concurred either to accelerate or produce a fatal result. To connect a stricture of the gullet, proving fatal, with the effects of poisoning by a mineral acid, it would be necessary to show that there was no tendency to this disease before the acid was administered; that the symptoms appeared soon after the first effects of the poison went off; that these symptoms continued to become aggravated until the time of death; and, lastly, that there was no other cause to which death could with any probability be referred. These remarks apply equally to the secondary fatal effects of any poison—such, for instance, as the salivation occasionally induced by corrosive sublimate, and the exhaustion and depression which are caused by tartarated antimony, when the acute symptoms of poisoning by these substances have passed away. The characters of chronic poisoning have acquired a special interest for the medical jurist. There is a difficulty about them which no accuracy of observation or judgment can surmount. The poison or poisons, if found in the dead body at all, must usually exist in minute quantities only. This alone will be sufficient to create a doubt whether death has been caused by the poison, although it is quite consistent with medical experience that a person may die from chronic poisoning, and little or none of the poison be found in the body after death. In the case of Mrs. James {Reg. v. Winslow), not more than the tenth part of a grain of antimony was found in the whole of the tissues of the body: in the case of Isabella Banks {Meg. v. Smethurst, C. C. C, Aug., 1859), the quantity was greater than this, but less than a grain altogether; while in the case of Mrs. Peters, none was found in the body, although a chemist had extracted a quantity of antimony as sulphide from the urine of the deceased within less than nine days before her death. In this case antimony had also been found in the evacuations during hfe, and to the secret use of this mineral had been referred the intermittent irritation of the stomach and bowels, from which deceased had suffered. The jury returned a verdict that the deceased had died from disease, and that death was accelerated by some irritant. (' Lancet,' 1860, ii. p. 119.) On some trials for poisoning {Reg. V. Palmer, C. C. C, 1856; Reg. v. Chantrelle, High Ct. of Just. Edin., May, 1878) it has been a contested scientific question whether a person can die from poison and no trace of the poison remain in the body. The evidence in Mrs. Peter's case not only proves the affirma- tive, but goes to show that antimony may act fatally and be entirely eliminated from the system in about a week. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1860, ii. pp. 190, 271, 317.) 2. Evidence from the appearances in the tody.—One of the chief means of determining whether a person has died from poison, is an examination of the body after death. In relation to external appear- ances, there are none indicative of poisoning upon which we can safely rely. It was formerly supposed that the bodies of persons who wei-e


[77/872 b22652516_0077.jp2]

REDNESS OF THE MUCOUS MEMBRANE. 6s poisoned putrefied more rapidly than those of others who had died from natm-al disease; and evidence for or against poisoning was at one time derived from the external appearance of the body. This is now known to be an error: the bodies of persons poisoned are not more rapidly decomposed, cceteris paribus, than those of others who have died a sudden and violent death from any cause whatever. Irritant poisons act chiefly upon the stomach and intestines, which they irritate, inflame, and may corrode. We may liliewise meet with all the consequences of inflammation, such as softening, thickening, ulceration, perforation, or gangrene. Sometimes the coats of the viscera are thickened, at other times thinned' and softened, by the action of an irritant. Neurotic poisons do not commonly leave any well-marked appear- ances in the body. The • stomach and intestines may present no unnatural changes. There may be greater or less fulness of the vessels of the brain and spinal marrow, as well as of their membranes; but even this is often so slight as to escape notice, unless attention be particularly directed to these organs. Effusion of blood is rarely found. It is important to bear in mind that both irritants and neurotics may destroy life without leaving any appreciable changes in the body. To such cases as these, the remarks about to be made do not apply. The proofs of poisoning must, in such exceptional cases, be procured entirely from other sources. A:ny evidence derivable from the appearances in the body of a person poisoned will be imperfect unless we are able to distinguish them from those analogous changes often met with as the results of ordinary disease. These are confined to the mucous mem- brane of the stomach! and bowels. They are redness, ulceration, softening, and perforation. Each of these conditions may depend upon disease, as well as upon'the action of irritant poisons. Redness.—It is a main character of the irritants to produce, as a result of inflammation^ redness of the mucous or lining membrane of the stomach and small intestines.. This redness, when first seen, is usually of a deep crimson colour, becoming brighter by exposure to air. It may be diffused over the whole mucous membrane : at other times it is seen in patches, dots, or lines (striae) spread irregularly over the surface of the stomach. It is sometimes met with at the smaller, but more commonly at the larger, end of this organ; and, again, we occasionally find the folds or prominences only of the mucous mem- brane presenting this red or inflamed appearance. Redness of the mucous membrane may, however, be due to gastritis, active digestion, the use of stimulants, or disease ;; and in order to assign the true cause of inflammation, it will be necessary to have an account of the symptoms preceding death, or some chemical proof of the existence of irritant poison in the contents of the stomach or in the tissues of the body. In the healthy state, the mucous membrane of the stomach is pale and white, or nearly -so, except durmg digestion, when it is slightly reddened; and redness has often remained in the stomachs of those F


[78/872 b22652516_0078.jp2]

ULCERATION. 66 who have died during the performance of the digestive process. When in contact with the spleen or hver, after death, the stomach is apt to acquire a deep Hvid colour from the transudation of blood; and it is well known that the bowels acquire a somewhat similar colour from the gravitation of blood which always takes place after death. In sudden death from valvular disease of the heart, the mucous membrane of the stomach is sometimes found intensely reddened. None of these appearances are likely to be mistaken for the action of an irritant poison. There is an important class of cases in which redness of the mucous membrane of the stomach is found after death, not dependent on the action of poison or on any easily assignable cause. These cases, owing to their being so little known, and involved in much obscurity, deserve the attention of a medical jurist, since the appearances closely resemble those produced by irritant poison. A person may die without suffering from any symptoms of disordered stomach; but on an inspection of the body, a general redness of the mucous membrane of this organ will be found, not distinguishable from the redness which is so commonly seen in arsenical poisoning. Several cases of this kind have occurred ; and drawings which have been made of the appearance presented by the stomach are preserved in the Guy's Hospital Museum. Tidy is, however, of opinion that there is always ecchymosis of the stomach after death from arsenical poisoning. The redness of the lining membrane of the stomach, in cases of poisoning, is so speedily altered by putrefaction, when circumstances are favourable to this process, as frequently to render it impossible for a witness to speak with any certainty upon its cause. Putrefactive infiltration of the blood contained in the adjacent viscera and muscles will give a reddish appearance to a stomach otherwise in a healthy condition. Great dispute has arisen respecting the length of time during which redness of the stomach produced by an irritant will be recognizable and easily distinguishable from putrefactive changes. It is sufficient to say that no certain rule can be laid down on the sub- ject : it must be left to the knowledge and discretion of the witness. We have distinctly seen the well-marked appearances of inflammation produced by arsenic in the stomach and duodenum in exhumed bodies twenty-eight days and six months respectively after interment; and in another instance, the reddened state of the mucous membrane, in a case of arsenical poisoning, was plainly perceptible on removing a layer of arsenic nineteen months after interment. If, however, there should be a reasonable doubt respecting the cause of the redness, and no poison is detected, it would be unsafe to rely upon this appearance alone as evidence of poisoning. (See page 43, ante.) Ulceration.—In irritant poisoning the stomach is occasionally found ulcerated; but this is, comparatively speaking, a rare occurrence. In such cases the mucous membrane is removed in small, distinct, circular patches, under the edges of which the poison (often arsenic) may be found. Ulceration of the stomach is a more common result of disease than of the action of poison. As a consequence of disease, it is very


[79/872 b22652516_0079.jp2]

67 SOFTENING. PERFORATION OF THE STOMACH. insidious, going on often for weeks together without giving any indi- cations of its existence, except perhaps slight gastric disturbance, with occasional nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite. In this case, the ulceration is commonly seen in small, circumscribed patches. It is worthy of remark, as a means of distinction, that ulceration has never been known to take place from arsenic or any irritant poison until symptoms indicative of irritant poisoning have occurred. In ulceration from disease, the mucous membrane is commonly reddened in the neighbourhood of the ulcer. In ulceration from poison, the redness is generally diffused over other parts of the stomach, as well as over the duodenum and small intestines. A case, however, occurred in Guy's Hospital, in which, with a small circular patch of ulceration near the cardiac opening, the whole mucous membrane was red and injected; but this singular condition of the stomach, so closely resembhng the effects of an irritant poison, was unaccompanied by any marked symp- toms of irritation during life. The history of a case previous to death will thus commonly enable us to determine to what cause the ulceration found may be due. Care must be taken to distinguish ulceration from corrosion. Ulceration is a vital process : the substance of a part is removed by the absorbents as a result of inflammation. Corrosion, on the other hand, is a chemical action: :the parts are removed by the immediate contact of the poison; they are decomposed; their vitality is destroyed, and they combine with the corrosive matter itself. Ulceration requires time for its establishment, while corrosion is a very rapid effect. Softening.—The coats of the stomach are not unfrequently found so soft as to yield and break down under very slight pressure; and this may be the result either of poisoning, of some spontaneous morbid change in its structure during life, or of the solvent action of the gastric juice after death. As this condition of the stomach, when caused by poison, is produced by those substances only which possess corrosive properties, it follows that, in such cases, traces of their action will be perceived in the mouth, throat, and gullet. In softening from disease, the change will be confined to the stomach alone, and it is commonly found only at the cardiac or greater end of the organ. When softening is really caused by an irritant poison, it is generally attended by other striking and unambiguous marks of its operation. Softening is not to be regarded as a common characteristic of poisoning, and is only an occasional appearance. Instances have been met with where the coats of the stomach were considerably hardened by sulphuric acid, or, oftener, by carbolic acid. Softening can never be inferred to have proceeded from poison, unless other well-marked changes are present, or unless the poison is discovered in the softened parts. The stomachs of infants have been frequently found softened from natural causes: such cases could not be mistaken for poisoning, since the history of them during life, the want of other appearances indicative of poisoning, and the total absence of poison from the viscera, would prevent such a suspicion from being entertained. Perforation.—The stomach may become perforated, either as a


[80/872 b22652516_0080.jp2]

PERFOEATION- OF THE STOMACH. 68 result of poisoning or of disease. Perforation from poisoning.—This may arise : 1, from corrosion; 2, from ulceration. The perforation by corrosion is by far the most common variety of perforation from poisoning. It is occasionally witnessed when a strong mineral acid has been taken, especially sulphuric acid ; the stomach, in such cases, is blackened and extensively destroyed, the aperture is large, the edges are rough and irregular, and the coats are easily lacerated. The acid escapes into the abdomen, and may be detected there by chemical analysis. The perforation from ulceration^ caused by irritant poison (arsenic), is but little known. There are but few instances on record. In a great number of poisoned subjects examined during many years past at Guy's Hospital, not a single case has occurred. It must, then, be looked upon as a rare appearance in cases of irritant poisoning. Perforation from disease.—This is by no means an unusual condition. Many cases of this disease will be found reported elsewhere. (' Guy's Hosp. Kep.,' ser. i., vol. iv., p. 8.) It is invariably fatal when it pro- ceeds so far that the contents of the stomach escape into the abdomen; but sometimes the stomach becomes glued to the pancreas or other organs during the ulcerative process, and then the person may recover. Several instances of this kind of adhesion have been met with in inspections. The symptoms from perforation commonly attack a person suddenly, while apparently enjoying perfect health. Hence these cases may be easily mistaken for those of irritant poisoning. The principal facts observed with regard to this formidable disease are the following:—1. It often attacks young women from eighteen to twenty-three years of age. 2. The preceding illness is extremely slight; sometimes there is merely loss of appetite, or a capricious appetite, with uneasiness after eating. 3. The attack commences with a sudden and severe pain in the abdomen, generally soon after a meal. The pain usually comes on gradually in irritant poisoning, and slowly increases in severity. 4. Vomiting, if it exists at all, is commonly slight, and is chiefly confined to what is swallowed. There is no purging : the bowels are generally constipated. In irritant poisoning the vomiting is usually severe, and purging is seldom absent. 5. The person dies commonly in from eighteen to thirty-six hours : this is also a usual period of death in the most common form of irritant poisoning, i.e. by arsenic; but in no case yet recorded has arsenic caused per- foration of the stomach within twenty-four hours, and it appears probable that a considerable time must elapse before such an effect could be produced by this or any irritant. 6. In perforation from disease the symptoms and death are clearly referable to peritonitis. 7. lii the perforation from disease the aperture is commonly of an oval or rounded form, about half an inch in diameter, situated in or near the lesser curvature of the stomach, and the edges are smooth. The outer margin of the aperture is often blackened, and the aperture itself is funnel-shaped from within outwards; i.e. the mucous coat is the most removed, and the outer or peritoneal coat the least. The coats of the stomach, round the edge of the aperture, are usually thickened for some distance; and when cut they have almost a cartilaginous


[81/872 b22652516_0081.jp2]

69 SPONTANEOUS PEKFORATION OF THE STOMACH. hardness. These characters of the aperture will not alone indicate whether it is the result of poisoning or disease; but the absence of poison from the stomach, with the want of other characteristic marks of irritant poisoning, would enable us to say that disease was the cause. Besides, the history of the case during life would materially assist us in our judgment. The great risk on these occasions is that the effects of disease may be mistaken for those of poisoning; for we are not likely to mistake a perforation caused by irritant poison for the result of disease. Notwithstanding the well-marked differences above described, it is common to meet with cases of imputed poisoning where death has really occurred from peritonitis following perforation. A case of this kind will be found elsewhere recorded. ('Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1851, p. 226.) In another the body was exhumed after several months' burial, and the stomach was found perforated from disease in the usual situation. Spontaneous or Gelatinized .Perforation.—The stomach is occasion- ally subject to a spontaneous change, by which its coats are softened, and give way, generally at the cardiac or greater end. As the effusion of the contents of the organ in such a case never gives rise to peritoneal inflammation, and no symptoms occur prior to death to indicate the existence of so extensive a destruction of parts, it is presumed to be a change in the dead body, and the coats of the stomach are supposed to undergo a process of solution or. digestion. It is commonly attributed to the solvent action of the gastric juice, the spleen, diaphragm, and other viscera being sometimes softened. Wilks states that this post- mortem or cadaveric perforation of the stomach is so rare a condition that it is not met with once in five hundred cases. In the last two cases in which it was observed by him, one patient had died from albuminuria, and the other from head-affection; but in neither of these could there be found any peculiarities regarding their 1 food, the time of the last meal, or the state of the bodies to account for the spontaneous destruction of the coats of the stomach. In January, 1845, the author met with an instance of this perforation in a child between two and three years of age. It was seized with convulsions, became insensible, and died twenty-three hours afterwards. After death, the greater end of the stomach was found destroyed to the extent of three inches ; and the edges were softened and blackened. There was no food in the stomach, and nothing had passed into this organ for thirty-two hours before death. It was therefore impossible to ascribe death to the per- foration, or the perforation to poison. (* Med. Gaz.,' vol. 36, p. 32.) An inspection of the body, with a general history of the case, will commonly suffice to remove any doubt in forming an opinion whether the extensive destruction, so commonly met with, has or has not arisen from poison. Thus, in a post-mortem perforation, the aperture is generally situated in that part of the stomach which lies to the left of the cardia; it is very large, of an irregular form, and ragged and pulpy at the edges, which have the appearance of being scraped. The mucous membrane of the stomach is not found inflamed. There is occasionally slight redness, with dark brown or almost black lines


[82/872 b22652516_0082.jp2]

SULPHURIC ACID. SYMPTOMS. 70 (striae) in and near the dissolved coats, which have an acid reaction. It can only be confounded with perforation by the action of corrosives ; but the well-marked symptoms during hfe, and the detection of the poison after death, together with the changes in the throat and gullet, will at once indicate the perforation produced by corrosive poison. Pavy has shown that after death the gastric juice dissolves the stomach. COEEOSIVE AND IRRITANT POISONS. CHAPTER 7. sulphuric acid, or oil of vitriol.—nitric acid, or aqua portis.— hydrochloric acid, or spirit of salt. — symptoms.—appearances and analysis. Sulphuric Acid, or Oil of Vitriol. Symptoms.—When this poison is swallowed in a concentrated form, the symptoms produced come on either immediately or during the act of swallowing. It has, however, been taken in mistake for a magnesian mixture, without the mistake being discovered till after the lapse of some time. There is violent burning pain, extending down the throat and gullet to the stomach, and the pam is often so severe that the body is bent. There is an escape of gaseous and frothy matter, followed by retching and vomiting; the latter accompanied b}'' the discharge of shreds of tough mucus and of a liquid of a dark coffee-ground colour, mixed with blood. The vomited matters may contain shreds of mucous membrane from the gullet and stomach, and even portions of the mus- cular tissue of the former. These may form complete casts of some portions of the gullet or stomach. The mouth is excoriated, the lining membrane and surface of the tongue white, or resembling soaked parch- ment ; and in one instance the appearance of the mouth was as if it had been smeared with white paint. After a time the membrane acquires a gi'ey or brownish colour ; the mouth is filled with a thick viscid sub- stance consisting of saliva, mucus, and the corroded membrane; this renders speaking and swallowing difficult. If the poison has been administered by a spoon, as in infants, or the phial containing it has been passed to the back of the throat, the mouth may escape the chemical action of the acid, and a child will not always scream under such circumstances. Around the lips and on the neck may be found spots of a brown colour from the spilling of the acid and its action on the skin. There is great difficulty of breathing, owing to the swelling and excoriation of the throat and larynx; and the countenance has from this cause a blueish or livid appearance. The least motion of the abdo-


[83/872 b22652516_0083.jp2]

SYMPTOMS. APPEARANCES. 71 minal muscles is attended with increase of pain. The stomach is so irritable that whatever is swallowed is immediately ejected, and the vomiting is commonly violent and incessant. The matters,/irs^ vomited generally contain the poison : they are acid, and, if they fall on a lime- stone pavement, there is effervescence ; if on coloured articles of dress, the colour is sometimes altered to a red or yellow, or it is entirely dis- charged and the texture of the stuff destroyed ; on a black cloth dress, the spots produced by the concentrated acid are reddish brown, and remain moist for a considerable time. After a time there is exhaus- tion, accompanied by great weakness; the pulse becomes quick, small, and feeble; the skin cold, mottled, and covered with a clammy sweat. There is generally great thirst, with obstinate constipation, and should any evacuations take place they are commonly either of a dark brown or of a leaden colour, and in some instances almost black from an admixture of altered blood. There are sometimes convulsive motions of the muscles, especially those of the face and hps. The countenance, if not livid from obstructed respiration, is pale, and expres- sive of great anxiety and intense suffering. The intellectual faculties are quite clear; and death usually takes place very suddenly, in from eighteen to twenty-four hours after the poison has been taken. Sulphate of indigo produces similar symptoms. The vomited matters are, how- ever, blueish-black. Appearances after Death.—The appearances met with in the body of a person who has died from the effects of this acid vary, according to whether death has taken place rapidly or' slowly. Supposing the case to have proved rapidly fatal, the membrane lining the mouth may be found white, softened, and corroded. The mucous membrane of the throat and gullet is commonly found corroded, having a brown-black or ash-grey colour, and blood is effused in patches beneath it. The corroded membrane of the gullet is occasionally disposed in longi- tudinal folds, portions of it being partly detached. The stomach, if not perforated, is collapsed and contracted. On laying it open, the contents are commonly found of a dark brown or black colour and of a tarry consistency, being formed in great part of mucus and altered blood. The contents may or may not be acid, according to the time the patient has survived, and the treatment which has been adopted. On removing them, the stomach may be seen traversed by black lines, or the whole of the mucous membrane may be stained black or of a dark brown colour. On forcibly stretching the coats, the red colour indicative of inflammation may be sometimes seen in the parts beneath, or surrounding the blackened portions. When the stomach is perforated, the coats are softened, and the edge of the aperture is commonly black and irregular. In removing the stomach, the opening is liable to be made larger by the mere weight of the organ. The contents do not always escape ; but, when this happens, the surrounding parts are attacked by the poison. The spleen, the liver, and the coats of the aorta have been found blackened and corroded by the acid, which had escaped through the perforation. In rare cases the lining membrane of the aorta has been found strongly


[84/872 b22652516_0084.jp2]

72 FATAL DOSE AND PERIOD. ANALYSIS. reddened. When a person has survived for eighteen or twenty hours, traces of corrosive and inflammatory action may be found in the small intestines. In one case the mucous membrane of the ileum was corroded. The interior of the windpipe, as well as of the bronchial tubes, has also presented marks of the local action of the acid. The acid has thus destroyed life without reaching the stomach. A remark- able instance in which the poison penetrated into and destroyed both lungs has been reported. ('Med. Gaz.,' vol. 45, p. 1102.) It is important for a medical witness to bear in mind that the mouth, throat, and gullet are not always found in the state above described. Ogle met with a case in which the tongue was but slightly affected. Fatal Dose.—The dangerous effects of sulphuric acid appear to arise rather from its degree of concentration than from the absolute quantity taken. The quantity actually required to prove fatal must depend on many circumstances. If the stomach is full when the poison is swal- lowed, the action of the acid may be spent on the food and not on the stomach ; and a larger quantity might then be taken than would suffice-to destroy life if the organ were empty. The smallest quantity which is described as having proved fatal was in the following case. Half a teaspoonful of concentrated sulphuric acid was given to a child about a year old by mistake for castor oil. The usual symptoms came on, with great disturbance of breathing; and the child died in twenty- four hours. The quantity here taken could not have exceeded forty drops. ('Med. Gaz.,' vol. 29, p. 147.) It is, however, doubtful whether this small quantity would have proved fatal to an adult. The smallest fatal dose which Christison states he has found recorded is one drachm-; it was taken in mistake by a young man, and killed him in seven days. (' On Poisons.') Even when diluted, the acid will rapidly destroy life. A man swallowed, on an empty stomach, six drachms of the strongest acid diluted with eighteen drachms of water. He suffered from the usual symptoms, and died in two hours and a half. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1863, 1, p. 183.) Fatal JPeriod.—The average period at which death takes place in cases of acute poisoning by sulphuric acid, is from eighteen to twenty- four hours. The shortest case recorded occurred to Eapp. A man, set..50, swallowed three ounces and a half of concentrated sulphuric acid; he died in three quarters of an hour. (' Gaz. Med.,' Dec. 28, 1850.) On the other hand, there are numerous instances reported in which the poison has proved fatal, from secondary causes, at periods varying from one week to several months, and even years. Ghemical Analysis.—If the acid is in a concentrated state it pos- sesses these properties: 1. Wood, sugar, or other organic matter plunged into it, is speedily carbonized or charred, either with or with- out the application of heat. 2. When boiled with wood, copper-cut- tings, or mercury, it evolves fumes of dioxide of sulphur; this is immediately known by the odour, as well as by the vapour first render- ing blue, and then bleaching, starch-paper dipped in a solution of iodic acid. 3. When mixed with an equal bulk of water, great heat is evolved.


[85/872 b22652516_0085.jp2]

ANALYSIS. 73 Sulphuric acid when diluted does not carbonize organic substances. If, however, a glass rod be dipped in the diluted acid, and a mark be made with this upon writing-paper, and the paper be then gently dried before a fire, a black mark will be left wherever the acid has touched the paper. This 'test is applicable to organic .liquids containing sul- phuric acid. The best reagent for its detection is a solution of barium —either the nitrate or the chloride of barium. Having ascertained by test-paper that the suspected liquid is acid, and contains a free mineral acid (see below), we add to a portion of it a few drops of nitric acid, and then a solution of barium salt. If sulphuric acid is present, a white precipitate of sulphate of barium will fall down : this is insoluble in all acids and alkalies. If the precipitate is collected, dried, and heated to full redness for some minutes in a platinum crucible, or in a folded piece of platinum foil, with five or six parts of charcoal powder, it will, if a sulphate, be i converted into sulphide of barium. To prove this, we add to the calcined residue ihydrochloric acid, at the same time suspending over it a shp of filtering paper moistened with a solution of acetate of lead. If the precipitate obtained is a sulphate, the gas evolved will be sulphuretted hydrogen, known by its odour, and by its turning a salt of lead of a brown colour. Cyanide of potassium may be used as a reducing agent in place of charcoal, in a proportion of one part to three parts of the sulphate of barium. The mixture should be heated to fusion in a reduction-tube. On breaking the glass when cold, and laying the incinerated residue on paper or card wetted with a salt of lead, a brown stain indicative of sulphide of lead is produced; or the residue maybe dissolved in water, and a solution of acetate, of lead added to it. In liquids containing organic matter.—If sulphuric acid is mixed with such liquids as porter, coffee, or tea, the process for its detection is substantially the same, the liquid being first rendered clear by filtration. The precipitated sulphate of barium, if mixed with organic matter, may be purified by boiling it in strong nitric acid; but this is not commonly necessary, as the reduction of the dried precipitate may be equally well performed with the impure as with the pure sulphate. Some liquids, such as vinegar, porter, and most wines, generally con- tain a soluble sulphate,'but in small iproportion; therefore, if there is an abundant precipitate, there can 'be no doubt, cceteris paribus, that free sulphuric acid has been added to them. The liquid should in- variably be tested for the presence of a free or uncombined mineral acid. A solution of ferric acetate is mixed with solution of potassium sulphocyanide, and diluted till the colour is a very pale red. A drop or two of the suspected liquid' dropped into this solution will yield blood-red streaks if a free mineral acid be present. An alcoholic solu- tion of methyl-violet is rendered blue and then green when l-4000th of a free mineral or oxalic acid is present. Should the liquid be thick and viscid, like gruel, it may be diluted with water, and then boiled with the addition of a little acetic acid. The coats of the stomach should be cut up and boiled in distilled water. For the action of the barium test, it is not necessary that the liquid should be absolutely clear, provided it


[86/872 b22652516_0086.jp2]

DIALYSIS. is not so turbid as to interfere mechanically with the precipitation of the sulphate of barium. Dialysis.—When the acid is mixed with milk, decomposed blood, mucus, or other substances, rendering it thick and viscid, it may be readily separated by dialysis—a process which is apphcable to the other acid poisons, such as nitric, hydrochloric, and oxalic. A portion of the acid viscid hquid should be placed in a test-tube, about five inches long, and one inch in diameter, open at both ends; the neck being securely covered with a layer of thin bladder or parchment- paper. The tube is then immersed, mouth down- wards, in a beaker containing distilled water (Fig. 1). After some hours the acid will pass through the membrane, and may be detected in the water. This process may be' employed as a trial test of i the contents of the stomach when they have a strongly acid reaction. In thus testing for sulphuric acid it must be remembered that a sulphate, such as Epsom salts, may be pre- sent in the liquid ; and that an innocent acid, like vinegar or lemon^juice, may give the acid reaction. Peaker and tube for To remove any. fallacy on this ground, a portion the dialysis of liquid of the liquid tested should be evaporated, and P"*^^"^* the residtie incinerated, when the alkaline sul- phate, if present, will be obtained in the sohd form. It is a medico-legal fact of considerable importance, that the contents of a stomach in a case of poisoning by sulphuric acid are sometimes entirely free from any tracesof this poison, even when it has been swallowed in large quantity. Casper relates three such cases. The acid is not commonly found when the person has been under treatment; when there has been considerable vomiting, aided by the drinking of water or other simple liquids ; or when he has survived several days. Sulphuric acid may be detected on articles' of clothing by a similar process. The concentrated acid produces reddish brown stains on black cloth—the spots remain damp, and the fibre of the stuff is gradually softened and corroded. The stained portion of cloth should be boiled in water, and the solution filtered, tested for free acid (see p. 73, ante), and then with a salt of barium. If any free acid is present, the stained stuff and the solution obtained from it will .redden litmus-paper. Some- times the detection of the acid on clothing is the only source of chemical evidence in cases of poisoning. It has been thrown on the person for the purpose of producing bodily injury or injury to the clothes. In such cases it must be proved that the substance is of a corrosive nature, but it is not necessary to show that injury has been done to the person. The acid sulphates, such as alum, act as irritant poisons when given in large doses. Tardieu, who gives the details of two cases of fatal poisoning by alum ('L'Empoisonnement,' p. 218), is of opinion that from half an ounce to an ounce of the salt is a fatal dose for an adult. In 1888, Bull communicated to the editor a case in which a diphtheritic child, set. 3 years, died from the effects of a teaspoonful of alum given


[87/872 b22652516_0087.jp2]

NITRIC ACID. SYMPTOMS. 75 in syrup as an emetic. Tlie child did not vomit, and died shortly after. The mucous membrane of the stomach was red and velvety, as if from the effects of a powerful irritant. Nitric Acid, oe Aqua Fortis. Symptoms.—When nitric acid is taken in a concentrated state, the symptoms bear a close resemblance to those produced by sulphuric acid. They come on immediately, and the swallowing of the acid is accompanied by intense burning pain in the throat and gullet, extend- ing downwards to the stomach : there are gaseous eructations, resulting from the chemical action of the poison, swelling of the abdomen, violent vomiting of liquid or solid matters, mixed with altered blood of a dark brown colour, and shreds of yehowish-coloured mucus having a strongly acid reaction. The abdomen is generally exquisitely tender; but, in one well-marked case of poisoning by this acid, the pain was chiefly confined to the throat: probably the poison had not reached the stomach. The mucous membrane of the mouth is commonly soft and white, after, a time becoming y-ellow, or even brown ; the teeth are also white or yellow, and the enamel is partially destroyed by the chemical action of the acid. There is great>difficulty of speaking and swallowing, the mouth being filled with viscid mucus ; the power of swallowing is, indeed, sometimes entirely lost. On opening the mouth, the tongue may be found swollen, and of a citron yellow colour; th« tonsils are also swollen and enlarged. As the symptoms progress, the pulse becomes small, frequent, andarregular—the surface of the body cold, and there are frequent rigors (shivering). The swallowing of liquids increases the severity of the pain and occasions vomiting. There is obstinate consti- pation. Death takes place in from eighteen to twenty-four hours, and is sometimes preceded, by a kind of stupor, from which the patient is easily roused. The intellectual faculties commonly remain clear until the last. Death may occur from pneumonia, the fumes of the acid having gained access to the lungs. The vapour of this acid is destructive to hfe.. In 1854 Mr. Haywood, an analytical chemist of Sheffield, lost his life under the following cir- cumstances. He was pouring a mixture of nitric and sulphuric acids from a carboy containing about sixty pounds, when by some accident the vessel was broken. For a few minutes, he inhaled the fumes of the mixed acids, but it does not appear that any of the liquid fell over him. Three hours after the accident he was sitting up and appeared to be in moderately good health. He was then seen by a medical man, and complained merely of some cuts about his hands. He coughed violently. In three hours more there was a difficulty of breathing, with increase of the coQgh. There was a sense of tightness at the lower part of the throat, and the pulse was hard. At times he said he could scarcely breathe. He died eleven hours after the accident. On inspection there was congestion of the windpipe and bronchial tubes, with effusion of blood in the latter. The heart was flaccid, and contained but little -blood ; and the hning membrane of the heart and aorta was inflamed.


[88/872 b22652516_0088.jp2]

NITEIC ACID. APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH. 76 The blood gave a slightly acid reaction to test paper. The wind- pipe was not examined. It is very probable the seat of mischief was in this organ, and that the deceased died from inflammatory effusion and swelling of the parts about the opening of the windpipe. (' Lancet,' 1854, i. p. 430.) A similar accident occurred to Mr. Stewart and one of the janitors of an educational institution in Edinburgh, in 1863. They both died from the effects of the acid vapour. (' Chem. News,' 1863, p. 132.) On Sept. 23, 1890, during attempts to extinguish a fire at some chemical stores, a bottle of nitric acid was broken. The action of the acid upon surrounding articles gave rise to abundant evolution of nitrous fumes, and two of the fire-brigade officers were so affected by their inhalation that they died the same day. (' Pharm. Jour.,' 1890-1, p. 252.) The fumes from batteries charged with nitric acid are often pro- ductive of serious results; and the editor has met with alarming illness arising from the inhalation of the nitrous fumes given off during the working of such batteries in an ill-ventilated room. Appearances after Death.—Supposing death to have taken place rapidly from the liquid acid, the following appearances may be met with. The skin of the mouth and lips will present various shades of colour, from orange-yellow to brown. Yellow spots produced by the spilling of the acid may be found about the hands and neck. The membrane lining the mouth is sometimes white—more commonly of a yellow colour ; and the teeth are white or yellowish in colour. The throat and windpipe are much inflamed. The lining membrane of the gullet is softened, of a yellow or brown colour, and easily detached, often in long shreds. The windpipe is congested, and the lungs also. The most strongly marked changes are seen in the stomach. When not perforated, this organ may be found distended with gas, its mucous membrane partially inflamed and covered with patches of a yellow, brown, or green colour, or it may be even black. Its coats may be so much softened as to break down under the shghtest pressure. Similar changes are found in the duodenum; but in some cases the small intestines have presented no other appearance than that of a slight redness. It might be supposed that the stomach would be in general perforated by this corrosive hquid; but perforation has not been often observed. In a case of the editor's, there was a small aperture in the anterior wall of the stomach, around which the peritoneum was ecchy- mosed ; but no lymph was exuded around the opening. It is probable that the rupture had taken place about the time of death, which super- vened seventeen hours after the acid was taken. (' Guy's Hosp. Kep.,' 1872, xvii. p. 223.) In a case which proved fatal after the long period of six months, there was, at the intestinal end of the stomach, a distinct cicatrix with puckering and hardening of the surrounding mucous membrane, causing a slight contraction of the intestinal orifice. The only other appearance consisted in some dark longitudinal lines on the posterior surface of the lining membrane of the gullet. These had probably been caused by the acid. (' Lancet,' 1860, ii. p. 510.) The smallest quantity of this acid which is reported to have destroyed


[89/872 b22652516_0089.jp2]

77 FATAL DOSE. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. life, is about hvo drachms in the case of a boy, aged thirteen, who died in thirty-six hours. Death commonly takes place within twenty-four hours. Sobernheim relates a case of poisoning by nitric acid, which proved fatal in one hour and three quarters. This is believed to be the most rapidly fatal instance on record, where the acid acted in the ordinary manner. The usual well-marked effects were found in the gullet, stomach, and small intestines. In infants, life may be destroyed by this poison in a few minutes, should it happen to reach the larynx. The longest case is, perhaps, that recorded by Tartra, where a woman died from exhaustion, produced by the secondary effects of the acid eight months after having swallowed it. Chemical Analysis.—In the simple state. This acid may be met with either concentrated or diluted. The concentrated acid varies in colour from a deep orange-red to a light straw-yellow. It may be recognized: 1. By evolving acid fumes when exposed to the air or when heated. 2. By its staining organic matter yellow or brown, the colour being heightened and turned to an orange-red by contact with the caustic alkalies. 3. When mixed with copper cuttings, it is rapidly decom- posed, deep red acid vapours are given off, and a greenish-coloured solution of nitrate of copper is formed. Tin or mercury may be sub- stituted for copper in this experiment. 4. The addition of gold-leaf and a few drops of hydrochloric acid: if nitric acid is present, the gold will be dissolved on warming the mixture. Common aqua fortis (nitric acid) sometimes contains, as impurity, a suflSciency of hydrochloric acid to dissolve gold-leaf. It strikes a deep brown colour with a solution of ferrous sulphate. In the diluted state.-^Tln^ acid is not precipitated like sulphuric by any common reagent, since all its saline combinations are soluble in water. 1. The hquid has a highly acid reaction, and (if not too diluted), on boiling it with some copper turnings, red fumes are given off, the hquid acquiring at the same time a blue colour. 2. A streak made on white paper with the diluted acid does not carbonize it when heated; but a scarcely visible yellow stain is left. 3. The liquid is neither precipitated by nitrate of barium nor by nitrate of silver. These last two experiments give merely negative results; they serve to show that sulphuric and' hydrochloric acids are absent. 4. The liquid is mixed with an equal bulk of pure sulphuric acid, partially cooled, and then a solution of ferrous sulphate is gently poured on to the surface of the mixture : a deep brown ring forms at the junction of the two liquids if nitric acid or a nitrate is present. In order to detect nitric acid when mixed with water or other liquids, the liquid should be first tested with litmus-paper, and also with ferric acetate and potassium sulphocyanate, or by means of methyl-violet, for the presence of a free mineral acid (see p. 73, ante). Two separate portions should then be carefully neutrahzed—the one with potash, the other with soda, and then each slowly evaporated to obtain crystals. If the liquid contains nitric acid, these crystals will have the following characters:—1. Those of nitrate of potassium appear in the form of long fluted prisms, which neither effloresce nor deliquesce on exposure to air. Those of nitrate of sodium have a rhombic form and


[90/872 b22652516_0090.jp2]

NITRIC ACID IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS. 78 closely simulate the appearance of the cubic crystals of common salt. One drop of the solution, evaporated spontaneously on glass, will suffice to yield distinct and well-formed crystals. 2. When moistened with strong sulphuric acid, the powdered crystals of either salt slowly evolve a colourless acid vapour. By this test the nitrate is known from every other deflagrating salt. 3. A portion of the powdered crystals should be placed in a small tube and mixed with an equal bulk of fine copper filings. The mass is then to be moistened with water, and a few drops of strong sulphuric acid added. Either with or without the apphcation of a gentle heat, decomposition immediately ensues, by which red nitrous fumes are evolved, recognizable by their colour, odour, and acid reaction. In operating on a small quantity of nitrate free from chloride, the crystals may be placed in a flask and mixed with one or two drops of concentrated sulphuric acid and a few copper filings. Place in the neck of the flask a shp of damp blue litmus-paper, and a slip of starch-paper moistened with a solution of iodide of potassium. After a longer or shorter interval the litmus will be reddened, and the starch-paper will assume a blue-black colour. If the nitrate should be mixed with much chloride, then the power of dissolving gold-leaf on boiling the dry salt with strong hydrochloric acid furnishes the best means of detection. 4. We add to the crystals a small portion of gold- leaf and hydrochloric acid ; then boil for a few minutes. If nitric acid or a nitrate is present, the gold will either partly or entirely disappear. Its partial solution will be indicated by a dark purple or brown colour on the addition of stannous chloride to the liquid after boiling. In liquids containing organic matter.—Nitric acid may be adminis- tered in such liquids as tea, vinegar, or porter. In this case, besides the acid reaction, there will be a peculiar smell produced by the strong acid, when mixed with organic substances. The application of the usual tests may be here counteracted: thus, unless the quantity of nitric acid in the liquid is considerable, the orange-red nitrous acid fumes are not evolved on boiling it with copper cuttings. The action on gold-leaf will enable a chemist to detect nitric acid in co0"ee, tea, and similar organic liquids, even when the proportion of acid is small. Boil a fragrant of gold-leaf in pure hydrochloric acid, and add while boiling a few drops of the suspected organic liquid to the mixture. If the acid is present, the gold will be dissolved. When the acid liquid is thick and turbid, a portion of it should be placed in a tube and submitted to the process of dialysis (seep. 74, ante). Vomited matters, as well as the contents and coats of the stomach (cut up), should be boiled in water, and filtered. If not cleared by filtration, they may be submitted to dialysis, and the acid water obtained care- fully neutralized with potash or soda and concentrated. If by filtra- tion we succeed in procuring a clear acid liquid, the colour is of no importance. A few drops of the neutralized and concentrated liquid may be evaporated on a glass slide, and the crystals thus obtained examined microscopically and compared with those of nitrate of potassium and of sodium. Paper dipped into the concentrated Hquid and dried burns with deflagration like touch-paper. The crystals obtained by


[91/872 b22652516_0091.jp2]

HYDROCHLORIC OR MURIATIC ACID. 79 evaporating the neutralized liquid are generally coloured with organic matter, but they fuse into a white mass when heated in a platinum capsule. The pure nitrate thus obtained may be tested as above described. The organic matter in the crystals does not interfere with the results of the copper and gold tests. When either nitric acid, or the nitrate into which it has been con- verted, is mixed with common salt, the copper test cannot be employed. The gold test will in such a case furnish the best evidence. Hydro- chloric acid with a small portion of gold-leaf may be added to the dried residue, and the mixture boiled. If nitric acid or a nitrate is present, even in minute proportion, some portion of the gold will be dissolved— a fact demonstrable by the addition of stannous chloride. Nitric acid may be detected in stains on clothing, if recent, by simply boiling the stained cloth in water. An acid liquid will be obtained, unless the stains are of old date or the stuff has been washed. This liquid, when concentrated, may be dealt with in the manner already described for organic liquids. The stains from this acid on black and blue cloth are of a yellow or brownish-yellow colour and are indelible. When long exposed they become dry, but the cloth is easily torn. A simple method of detecting the acid is to boil at once a piece of the stained cloth with a fragment of gold-leaf and hydrochloric acid. If nitric acid is present in the stain, a portion of the gold will be dissolved. In 1889, a man was convicted of the murder of a woman by pouring nitric acid down her throat whilst in bed {Reg. v. Lipski, C. C. C, July, 1888). In reality a mixture of acids, containing more sulphuric than nitric, was employed. Such a mixture does not char cellulose (wood and cotton) like sulphuric acid, but converts it into nitro- cellulose, which substance was found by the editor in the stains on the deceased woman's linen, and also in wood cut from the floor of the room in which the murder was committed. Hydeochloeic Acid. Mueiatic Acid. This acid, which is also called muriatic acid, and is popularly known under the name of spirit of salt, is often taken as a poison. In the cases which have hitherto been observed, the symptoms and appear- ances have been similar to those caused by nitric acid. A woman, set. 63, swallowed half an ounce of concentrated hydrochloric acid. She was received into the hospital in three quarters of an hour. The pro- minent symptoms were burning pain in the throat and stomach, feeble pulse, cold clammy skin, retching, and vomiting of a brown matter streaked with blood and containing shreds of membrane. There was great exhaustion. The throat became swollen, the patient lost the power of swallowing, and died in eighteen hours. She retained her senses until the last. The appearances in the body were as follows : The mucous membrane of the mouth and throat was white, softened, and destroyed in many places by the corrosive action of the acid. The mucous membrane of the gullet was red and inflamed. The back part of the stomach near the pylorus was dark-coloured, stripped of its mucous membrane (which was generally softened), and marked with


[92/872 b22652516_0092.jp2]

HYDROCHLORIC ACID. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 8o black lines. It was not perforated. ('Lancet,'1859, ii. p. 59.) In this case the smallest quantity of hydrochloric acid was taken which has as yet been known to prove fatal. In 1885, a man set. 37, was admitted' into Guy's Hospital after swal- lowing, for suicidal purposes, a fluid ounce of strong hydrochloric acid, in which he had dissolved a dram of oxalic acid. The ordinary anti- dotes were employed, and he progressed favourably till the tenth day, when he died rather suddenly. On post-mortem examination the editor found a membranous exudation and minute ulcers at the back of the pharynx. The mucous membrane of the gullet w^as white, thickened, and interspersed with small extravasations of blood. The stomach contained remains of food, of the ordinary acidity. The mucous membrane was white, and mammillated. Towards the pyloric or intestinal end there were small ulcers with open blood-vessels, from the mouths of which extended considerable extravasations of blood blackened by the action of the acids of the stomach. Between the ulcers the surface was raw and hemorrhagic. The hemorrhage ex- tended into the duodenum, but not beyond! Chemical Analyns.—In a concentrated state, hydrochloric acid evolves copious fumes. The ""pure acid is nearly colourless; the commercial acid is of a lemon-yellow colour, and frequently contains iron, arsenic, common salt, and other impurities. When boiled with a small quantity of peroxide of manganese, chlorine is evolved. It does not dissolve gold-leaf until a few drops of nitric acid have been added to it and the mixture is heated. In the diluted state, it may be recog- nized by the dense white precipitate which it gives when a solution of nitrate of silver is added to it. This precipitate is insoluble in nitric acid, but soluble • in ammonia; it becomes purple when exposed to hght; and when heated it' melts without decomposition, forming a yellowish-coloured solid on cooling. If the acid is contained in organic liquids in moderate quantity, it admits of separation by distillation to dryness. In this case any chlorides present are left in the retort. It may also be procured by dialysis in a pure enough state for testing (see p. 74, ante). In all cases the presence of a free mineral acid must be ascertained (see p..73, ante). Hydrochloric acid, in small quantity, as well as alkaline chlorides, is a natural constituent of'the fluids of the stomach and bowels. The presence of local chemical changes in the throat and stomach would show whether the acid' had been taken as a poison. If the acid is found only in minute quantity, no inference of poisoning can be drawn, unless there are distinct marks of its chemical action upon the throat and stomach. It darkens the blood like sulphuric acid, although it has not the same degree of carbonizing action on organic matter. The stains produced by this acid or black cloth are generally of ft red- dish colour. As the acid is volatile, it may disappear from the stuff". If recent, the acid may be separated by boiling the stuff" in water and applying the silver test, and the tests for a free mineral acid (see p. 73, ante). An unstained portion of cloth should be similarly tested for the sake of comparison.


[93/872 b22652516_0093.jp2]

OXALIC ACIP. SYMPTOMS. 8i CHAPTER 8. OXALIC ACID. — SYMPTOMS AND APPEAEANCES.—CHEMICAL ANALYSIS.— DIALYSIS OF ORGANIC LIQUIDS.—ACID OXALATE OF POTASSIUM, OR SALT OF SORREL.—VEGETABLE ACIDS. Oxalic Acid. Symptoms.—If this poison is taken in a large dose, i.e. from half an ounce to an ounce of the crystals, dissolved in water, a hot burning acid taste is experienced during the act of swallowing the poison. This is accompanied by a similar sensation extending down the gullet to the stomach. There is sometimes a sense of constriction or suffocation; the countenance is livid, and the surface of the skin soon becomes cold and clammy. Vomiting occurs either immediately or within a few minutes. Should the poison be much diluted, there is merely a sen- sation of strong acidity, and vomiting may not occur until after a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes. In some cases there has been little or no vomiting, while in others this symptom has been incessant until death. In one case, in which an ounce of the acid was swallowed, the vomiting and pain in the stomach continued until the fifth day, when the man died suddenly (' Lancet,' 1860, ii. p. 509); but in another, in which the poison was much diluted, vomiting did not occur for seven hours. (Christison.) The vomited matters are highly acid, have a greenish-brown or almost black colour, and consist chiefly of mucus and altered blood. The patient complains of great pain and tenderness in the abdomen, with a burning sensation in the stomach. There may be convulsions. There is in general an entire prostration of strength, so that if the person is in the erect position, he falls; there is hkewise unconsciousness of surrounding objects, and a kind of stupor, from which, however, the patient maa be without difficulty roused. Owing to the severity of the pain, the legs are sometimes drawn up towards the abdomen, or the patient rolls about on the floor or bed. The pulse is small, irregular, and scarcely perceptible; the skin cold and clammy; and there is a sensation of numbness in the limbs. The breathing is spasmodic, the inspirations being deep, and a long interval elapses between them. Should the patient survive the first effects of the poison, the following symptoms may appear: soreness of the mouth, constriction and burning pain in the throat, pain in swallowing, tenderness in the abdomen, and irritability of the stomach, so that there is frequent vomiting, accom- panied by purging. The tongue is swollen, and there is great thirst. Sometimes there is aphonia, or the patient speaks in a feeble punchi- nello voice. The following case is exceptional, from the fact that the symptoms throughout were chiefl}'' referable to the brain. A man took what was supposed to be a black draught, but it contained oxaHc acid instead of Epsom salts. Two hours afterwards he was found in a state G


[94/872 b22652516_0094.jp2]

OXALIC ACID. APPEARANCES. 82 of complete coma, but the symptoms set in in a quarter of an hour after he had taken the draught. The man (5ied in five hours, without recovering his consciousness. The only marked appearance on inspec- tion was intense congestion of the brain. ('Lancet,' 1872, ii. p. 41.) Oxalic acid injected into the circulation of animals acts as a cardiac poison; and this is in accordance with its well-known rapidly fatal effects on man. Christison says, ' If a person, immediately after swallowing a solution of a crystalline salt, which tasted purely and strongly acid, is attacked with burning in the throat, then with burning in the stomach, vomiting, particularly of bloody matter, imperceptible pulse, and excessive langour, and dies in half an hour, or, still more, in twenty, fifteeta, or ten minutes, I do not know any fallacy which can interfere with the conclusion that oxalic acid was the cause of death. No parallel disease begins so abruptly, and terminates so soon; and no other crystalline poison has the same effect.' Ringer asserts that soluble oxalates precipitate calcium from the blood as insoluble oxalate of calcium ; and as soluble calcium salts in the blood are requisite for the maintenance of the muscular contrac- tihty, oxalates may kill by destroying the cardiac muscular contrac- tility. (' Practitioner,' 1885, xxxiv. p. 81.) Appearances after Death.—The mucous membrane of the tongue, mouth, throat, and gullet is softened, "and commonly white as if bleached; but it is sometimes coated with a portion of the brown mucous matter discharged from the stomach. This latter organ con- tains a dark brown mucous liquid, often acid, and having an almost gelatinous consistency. On removing the contents, the mucous mem- brane will be seien pale and softened, without always presenting marks of inflammation or abrasion, if death has taken place rapidly. The mucous membrane is soft and brittle, easily raised by the scalpel, and presents the appearance which we might suppose it would assume after having been for some time boiled in water. The small vessels are seen ramifying over the surface, and filled with dark- coloured blood apparently solidified within them. The lining mem- brane of the gullet presents the same characters, and has often a worm-eaten appearance. It is pale, and appears as if it had been boiled in water, or digested in alcohol; it has been found strongly raised in longitudinal folds, interrupted by patches where the membrane has become abraded. In a case which was fatal in eight hours, the tongue was covered with white specks; the gullet was not inflamed, but the stomach was extensively destroyed, and had a gangrenous appear- ance. Portions of the mucous membrane were detached, exposing the muscular coat. With respect to the intestines, the upper portion may be found inflamed; but, unless the case is protracted, the appearances in the bowels afe not strongly marked. In a well-marked instance of poisoning by this acid, recorded by Hildebrand, the mucous membrane of the stomach and duodenum was much reddened, although the patient, a girl of eighteen, died in three quarters of an hour after taking one ounce of the acid, by mistake for Epsom salts. (Casper's ' Vierteljahrsschr.,' 1853, p. 256.)


[95/872 b22652516_0095.jp2]

83 FATAL DOSE. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. In a case of poisoning in which two ounces of the acid had been taken, and death was rapid, the coats of the stomach presented the almost black appearance produced by sulphuric acid, owing to the colour of the altered blood spread over them. In protracted cases, the gullet, stomach, and intestines have been found more or less congested or inflamed. In the case already cited, in which an ounce was swallowed, and death occurred on the fifth day, the stomach was slightly con- gested, and contained a bloody fluid, but the mucous membrane was entire. (' Lancet,' 1860, ii. p. 509.) The glairy contents of the stomach do not always indicate strong acidity until after they have been boiled in water. Oxalic acid does not appear to have so stronglj?" corrosive an action on the stomach as that possessed by the mineral acids. It is, therefore, rare to hear of the coats of the organ being perforated by it;. but the acid, when in a concentrated state, renders the mucous coat soft and brittle, and perforation of the coats may occasionally occur either during life or after death as a result of its chemical action. Wood has recorded the case of a woman, set. 27, found dead, whose death had been obviously caused by oxalic acid; but the quantity taken, and the duration of the case, were unknown. The stomach presented, at its upper and fore part near the cardiac opening,, an irregular aperture of a size to admit the point of the finger. Fatal Dose.—The smallest quantity of this poison which has been known to destroy life is 60 grains. A boy, set. 16, took that quantity, as he said, of the poison in a solid forin, and was found in about an hour insensible, pulseless, and his jaws spasmodically closed. He had vomited some bloody matter; his tongue and lips were unusually pale, but there was no excoriation. He died in eight hours. (' Lancet,' 1855, ii. p. 521.) Tardieu (' L'Empoisonnement,' p. 253) speaks of a fatal case in a young man, set. 16, from a dose of 30 grains (2 grammes), but it is doubtful, since he gives no details, whether this is not the English case just now mentioned. Two cases occurred at Guy's Hospital, in each of which half an ounce of oxalic acid had been swallowed. Active treatment was adopted, and both patients recovered. When the dose of oxahc acid is half an ounce and upwards, death commonly takes place within an hour; but there are numerous exceptions to this rapidity of action. Christison mentions an instance in which an ounce of oxalic acid killed a girl in thirty minutes; and another in which the same quantity destroyed life in ten minutes ;, but in a third case death did not occur until the fifth day. The editor has met with cases of death in fifteen and twenty minutes respectively. Ogilvy has reported a case of poisoning by oxalic acid in which it is probable that death took place within three minutes after the poison had been swallowed. The quantity of the acid taken could not be determined. Chemical Analysis.—In the simple state.—This acid may be met with, either as a soHd or in solution in water. Solid oxalic acid crystalhzes in long slender prisms, which, when perfect, are four-sided (Fig. 2). In this respect it differs from other common acids, mineral and vegetable. The crystals are unchangeable in air, and to the eye


[96/872 b22652516_0096.jp2]

84 OXALIC ACID. TESTS. Crystals of Oxalic Acid, magnified 30 diameters. Tests.—1. Nitrate of silver. are precisely like those of Epsom salts and white vitriol; they are soluble in water and alcohol, forming strongly acid solutions. When heated on platinum-foil they melt, and are entirely dissipated without black- ening. Heated in a close tube, they melt, and a white crystalline sublimate forms in the cold part of the tube. ^^^^^^(11 ^"^^^^1^ There should be no residue whatever fll'^'^^lf^ <^^yV ^^^^ pure, but the commercial u T\ \r /if fl. M #/l acid generally leaves a slight residue of fixed impurity. By this effect of heat, oxalic acid is easily distinguished from those crystalline salts for which it has been sometimes fatally mis- taken, namely, the sulphates of mag- nesium and zinc: these leave white residues. A teaspoonful of oxalic acid in small crystals weighs seventy-six grains, and half an ounce of the crystals is equivalent to three teaspoonfuls. When added to a solution of oxalic acid, it produces an abundant white precipitate of oxalate of silver. A solution containing so small a quantity of oxalic acid as not to redden litmus-paper, is affected by this test; but when the quantity of poison is small, it is advisable to concentrate the liquid by evaporation before applying the test. The oxalate of silver is identified by the following properties. It is completely dissolved by cold nitric acid. If collected on a filter, thoroughly dried, and heated on platinum-foil, it is dissipated in a white vapour with a slight detonation, and a residue of silver is left. When the oxalate is in small quantity, this detonation may be observed in detached particles on burning the filter previously well dried. 2. Sulphate of calcium. A solution of oxalic acid is precipitated white by lime-water and all the salts of calcium. Lime-water is itself objectionable as a test, because it is precipitated white by several other acids. The salt of calcium, which, as a test, is open to the least objec- tion, is the sulphate. As this is not a very soluble salt, its solution must be added in rather large quantity to the suspected acid poisonous liquid previously concentrated. A white precipitate of oxalate of calcium is slowly formed. This precipitate should possess the following pro- perties :—1. It ought to hQ immediately dissolved by nitric or hydro- chloric acid. 2. It ought not to be dissolved by acetic, or any other vegetable acid, or by ammonia. In organic liquids.—The process is the same, whether it is applied to liquids in which the poison is administered, or to the matters vomited, or, lastly, to the contents of the stomach. Should the liquid be very acid, we must filter it to separate any insoluble matters; should it not be strongly acid, the whole may be boiled if necessary with distilled water filtered, and concentrated by evaporation. To the filtered liquid, acidulated with acetic acid, acetate of lead should be


[97/872 b22652516_0097.jp2]

OXALIC ACID, ITS DETECTION. 8s' added until there is no further precipitation ; and the white precipitate formed, collected and washed. If any oxalic acid was present in the liquid, it will exist in this precipitate as oxalate of lead. Diffuse the precipitate in water, and pass into the hquid a current of sulphuretted hydrogen gas for about half an hour, taking care that the gas comes in contact with every portion of the precipitate. Black sulphide of lead will be thrown down, and with it commonly the greater part of the organic matter mixed with the oxalate of lead. Filter, to separate the sulphide of lead; the filtered liquid may be clear and highly acid. Concentrate by evaporation, when the sulphuretted hydrogen dissolved in the liquid is thereby expelled, and oxalic acid may be ultimately obtained crystallized by slow evaporation in a watch-glass, or on a glass shde for microscopical observation. If crystals are obtained, they must be dissolved in water and tested in the manner above directed. As oxalic acid is very soluble in alcohol, this liquid may be occasionally employed for separating it from the contents of the stomach and from many organic compounds. Crystals may be obtained from the alcoholic solution, and these may be purified and tested by the methods already d-escribed. Owing to the effect of early vomiting and treatment, it is not usual to find much oxalic acid in the contents of the stomach. From milk, gruel, coffee, blood, mucus, and other viscid liquids, oxalic acid is readily separated by the process of dialysis, as described under sulphuric acid (see p. 74, ante). The liquid should be first boiled—the coats of the stomach (cut up) being included, if necessary. The distilled water placed on the outside of the tube w411 receive the acid. This may be concentrated by evaporation. Prismatic crystals may thus be procured, and the silver and sulphate of calcium tests may be applied. The presence of oxalic acid in an organic liquid may be detected by another dialytic method. Place a portion of the liquid containing the poison in a beaker, and insert in this a tube secured with skin or parchment-paper containing a solution of sulphate of calcium. The oxalic acid will penetrate the membrane, and will form inside the mouth of the latter a deposit of crystals of oxalate of calcium, known by their octahedral form (Fig. 3).^ Sometimes the chemical evidence may depend on stains on articles of clothing. Oxahc acid discharges the colour of some dyes, and slowly reddens others; but unless the stuff has been washed, the acid remains in the fabric, and may there be detected. Fig. 3. Crystals of Calcium Oxalate obtained by- dialysis of Coffee containing Oxalic Acid, magnified 350 diameters. It does not corrode


[98/872 b22652516_0098.jp2]

SALT OF SORREL. VEGETABLE ACIDS. 86 or destroy the stuft" like mineral acids. In Beg. v. Morris (C. C. C, Dec. 1866) it was proved that the prisoner had attempted to administer a liquid poison forcibly to her daughter, a girl aged six years. It was sour in taste, made the girl's hps smart, and caused vomiting. There was dryness of the hps, and inflammation of the lining membrane of the mouth. No portion of the sub&tance administered could be pro- cured, but a crystalline deposit of oxalic acid was obtained from some stains on the dress of the child. The woman was convicted. Acid Oxalate of Potassium, or Salt of Sorrel.—Symptoms and Effects.—This poisonous salt is much used for the purpose of bleaching straw and removing ink-stains, and is sold for this purpose under the name of essential salts of lemons. Its poisonous properties are not generally known, or no doubt it would be frequently substituted for oxalic acid. Out of four cases of poisoning by this substance, three proved fatal, while in the other the patient recovered. In the case of recovery, a young lady, aged twenty, swallowed an ounce of the salt dissolved in warm water. She was not seen for an hour and a half, and was then found on the floor, faint and exhausted, having previously vomited considerably. There was great depression, the skin cold and clammy, the pulse feeble, and there was a scalding sensation in the throat and stomach. There was also continued shivering. Proper medical treatment was adopted, and she recovered in two days, still suffering from debility and great irritation of the stomach. During the state of depression, it was remarked that the eyes were much injected and the pupils dilated. There was also great dimness of vision. (' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 27, p. 480.) This salt destroys life almost as rapidly as oxalic acid itself; and in the symptoms which it produces, it closely resembles that poison. In one case, half an ounce killed an adult in so short a time as eight minutes; but probably the fatal effects were in this instance accelerated by the debilitated state of the person who took it. In another case death took place in ten minutes. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1850, vol. 1, p. 162.) In some instances this poisonous substance has been supplied by mis- take for cream of tartar, and has thus caused death. Chemical Analysis.—It is not very soluble in cold water, but its solution may be readily mistaken for that of oxalic acid. The tests for oxalic acid may be applied for the detection of it in this salt. When a portion is heated, carbonate of potassium is left. Vegetable Acids. The vegetable acids, such as the acetic, tartaric, and citric, are capable of acting as poisons. The editor has met with alarming laryngeal symptoms, besides the local corrosive action, produced by the swallowing of acetic acid. Bayard and Devergie have recorded a fatal case of poisoning with tartaric acid. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' xlvi. p. 433.) In 1877 a woman, set. 58, died in Sheffield from taking a quantity of aromatic vinegar.


[99/872 b22652516_0099.jp2]

87 ALKALINE POISONING. CHAPTER 9. ALKALIES AND ALKALINE SALTS.—POTASH, SODA, AND AMMONIA.—NITRATE AND SULPHATE OF POTASSIUM.—SALTS OP BARIUM. Potash and Soda. Symptoms.—The symptoms produced by potash and soda, when taken in large doses, are similar, so that one description will serve fo;r both. The most common form in which these poisons are met with is in the state of pearlash (carbonate of potassium) and soap-leys (ca^ustic soda). The person experiences, during the act of swallowing, an acrid caustic taste, owing to the alkaline Hquid, if sufficiently concentrMed, excoriating the mucous membrane. There is a persistent sensation of burning heat in the throat, extending downwards to the stomach. Vomiting is not always observed; but when it does occur, the vomited matters are sometimes mixed with blood of a dark brown colour, and with detached portions or flakes of mucous membrane—this effect depending on the degree of causticity in the liquid swallowed. The surface is cold and clammy, and there is purging with severe pain in the abdomen, resembling colic. The pulse is quick and feeble. In the course of a short time, the lips, tongue, and throat become swollen, soft, and red. Other symptoms of a more serious kind sometimes show themselves. In 1877, a cook in a girls' boarding-school put four ounces of washing soda (crude carbonate) into the tea supplied to the pupils. They suffered from severe colicky griping pains and purging, continuing for several days, with loss of appetite, and general feeling of weakness. One girl, set. 16, who had partaken freely of the tea, in addition to these symptoms, suffered severely on the fifth day from purpura. There was hsematemesis, with profuse bleeding from every mucous surface, and spots of ecchymosis on all parts of the skin. She had a tedious and very difficult recovery. It was calculated that she had taken about two drachms of soda. The most rapidly fatal case of alkaline poisoning reported is that of a boy, who died in three hours after swallowing three ounces of a strong solution of carbonate of potassium. Appearances after Death.—In recent cases there are marks of the local action of the poison on the mucous membrane of the mouth, throat, and gullet. This membrane has been found softened, detached, and inflamed in patches of a deep chocolate colour—sometimes almost black. A similar appearance has been met with in the mucous mem- brane of the larynx and windpipe. The stomach has had its mucous surface destroyed in patches, and there has been partial inflammation. In one instance, as the result of the action of soda, it was puckered, hardened, and blackened. The quantity of these alkahne poisons required to destroy life is unknown. The fatal effects depend rather


[100/872 b22652516_0100.jp2]

ALKALIES. AMMONIA. 88 on the degree of concentration of the liquid than on the absolute quan- tity of alkah present. Chemical Analysis.—When potash or soda, or the carbonate of either alkah, is contained in a poisonous proportion in any organic hquid, it will be observed that the liquid has not only a strongly alkaline reaction, but is soapy to the feel, frothy when shaken, and has a peculiar odour. The alkah may be obtained in the state of carbonate or otherwise by simply evaporating the suspected hquid and incine- rating the residue in a silver or porcelain vessel. The presence of potash or soda may be easily determined by the appropriate tests for these alkalies. Potash gives a violet, and soda an intensely yellow colour to a colourless gas-flame. Ammonia. The vapour of strong^ ammonia is poisonous. Several severe cases have been seen by the editor. It may destroy hfe by producing inflammation of the larynx, or of the lungs and air-passages. It is often employed injudiciously to rouse persons from a fit. A case is on record of an epileptic having died with the symptoms of croup, two days after the application of the vapour of strong ammonia to the nostrils, in order to- rouse him from a fit. Symptoms and Appearances.—The strong solution of ammonia pro- duces, when swallowed, symptoms similar to those described in speaking of potash, but, as it is much more irritating, it causes a choking sen- sation, followed by intense heat and burning pain in the throat, gullet, and stomach. Serious injury to the organs of respiration is one of the results of the action of this poison. A man liable to attacks of fainting, died in three days after swallowing a quantity of a hquid administered to him by his son. This liquid, which was at the time believed to be sal volatile, was, in fact, a strong solution of ammonia. The deceased complained immediately of a sensation of choking and strangling in the act of vomiting. Symptoms of difiiculty of breathing set in, with other signs of irritation in the throat and stomach. The mucous membrane of the mouth and throat was corroded and dissolved; and it was evident that the liquid had caused great local irritation. The difficulty of breathing was such as to threaten suffocation, and at one time it was thought tracheotomy must be resorted so. The state of the patient, however, precluded performance of the operation, and he died on the third day. On inspection, the viscera presented strong marks of corrosion. The covering of the tongue was softened, and had peeled off'; the lining membrane of the air-passages was softened and covered with layers of false membrane, the result of inflammation; and the larger bronchial tubes were completely obstructed by casts of cylinders of this membrane. The lining membrane of the gullet was softened, and at the lower part, near its junction with the stomach, the tube was completely dissolved and destroyed. There was an aperture in the anterior wall of the stomach, about an inch and a half in diameter: the


[101/872 b22652516_0101.jp2]

AMMONIA. 89 edges were soft, ragged, and blackened, presenting an appearance of solution. The contents of the stomach had escaped. On the inside, the vessels were injected with dark-coloured blood, and there were numerous small effusions of blood in various parts of the mucous membrane. The coats were thinned and softened at the seat of the aperture. The blackened and congested appearance of the lining membrane somewhat resembled that which is seen in poisoning with sulphuric or oxalic acid. The mucous matter on the coats of the stomach was feebly acid. No poison of any kind was found in the layer of mucus or in the coats. There was not in any part the slightest trace of ammonia, the poison which had caused the mischief. The deceased had lived three days; remedies had been used, and every trace of ammonia had disappeared. The immediate cause of death was obstruction of the air-tubes, as a result of inflammation, caused by the local irritant action of the liquid: it was quite obvious that a quantity had entered the windpipe. The perforation of the stomach had probably taken place shortly before death, or was, perhaps, post-mortem, as there were no marks of peritonitis. The injmry to the stomach and gullet would have been sufficient to cause death, even supposing that the liquid had not penetrated into the lungs. A child, about two years old, swallowed a teaspoonful of strong solution of ammonia. It fell to the floor breathing hurriedly, and became blue in the face. An hour afterwards, there were white patches on the tongue and cheeks, with congestion of the tonsils and pharynx. There was frequent vomiting, but no blood in the vomits. Pulse, 164; temperature, 102*8° F. The child died the next day. It was unconscious, and there were convulsions at intervals. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1878, i. p. 35.) Solution of ammonia applied to the skin acts as a corrosive, and may inflame or cause the destruction of the parts which it touches. A man was convicted {Reg. v. Gavan, Stafford Sum. Ass., 1873) of throwing a liniment, containing a strong solution of ammonia, over the prosecutrix, with intent to injure her. The liquid was thrown in her face, and some portion reached the eyes; but she recovered from the effects. A weak solution acts as an irritant to the skin, while a strong solution causes vesication and a destruction of the part. Carbonate of Ammonium.—The concentrated solution of this salt (sal volatile) is probably more active as a poison than is commonly supposed. A man, in a fit of passion, swallowed about five fluid drachms of a solution of sal volatile. In ten minutes he was seized with stupor and insensibility; but, upon the application of stimulant remedies, he recovered. He suffered for some time afterwards from severe irritation about the throat and gullet. A female, set. 19, while in a state of unconsciousness, was made to swallow a quantity of hartshorn. She immediately felt a severe pain in the stomach, and in about an hour afterwards she vomited some blood. This vomiting of blood continued for several days. These symptoms were followed by great irritability of the stomach, and the constant rejection of food. There was obstinate constipation of the bowels, with emaciation and loss of strength. She died in about


[102/872 b22652516_0102.jp2]

90 NITEATE AND CHLORATE OF POTASSIUM. three months from the time at which she had swallowed the alkaline poison. On inspection, the gullet was found healthy; but the orifice, at its junction with the stomach, was slightly contracted. The intestinal opening (pylorus) was contracted to the size of a crow-quill, and the coats were thickened. On the posterior wall of the stomach there was a dense cicatrix of the size of a half-crown, and from this point fibrous bands ramified in various directions. The duodenum and other parts of the intestinal canal were healthy. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1853, ii. p. 554.) Chemical Analysis.—Ammonia is distinguished from potash and soda by its pungent odour and entire volatility. Carbonate of Ammonium may be known from other salts by its alkaline reaction, its odour, and its volatility as a solid; and from pure ammonia by its effervescing on the addition of an acid. Nitrate of Potassium. Nitee. Saltpetre. Symptoms and Appearances.—This well-known salt has on several occasions destroyed life when taken in large doses. A man swallowed by mistake for Epsom salts, an ounce of nitre mixed with water. It produced vomiting with severe pain, but no purging. There was coldness of the surface and lividity of the face. Death took place in three hours. On inspection the mucous membrane of the stomach was found highly inflamed, especially towards the middle of the greater curvature, where, for several inches, it resembled scarlet cloth. The pylorus and duodenum were of a deep crimson colour. The peritoneal surface was reddened, especially over the stomach, the vessels having a vermilion colour, as if they had been injected. The heart and lungs were healthy, the blood was fluid, and more florid than natural. The other organs presented no unusual appearances. No analysis was made of the contents of the stomach, but that the nitre was the cause of death no doubt could be entertained, and a verdict was returned accordingly at the coroner's inquest. Another man took an ounce of saltpetre in mistake for Epsom salts. Pain came on immediately, with profuse perspiration. He felt sick, but did not vomit till more than four hours had elapsed. When seen, between six and seven hours after taking the nitre, his pulse was 56 and full. The tongue was white, moist, and tremulous. Micturition was frequent for the first three hours. He recovered. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1882, i. p. 304.) Two cases are recorded of recovery after the administration of two ounces of salpetre. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1877, ii. p. 520; 1882, i. p. 500.) Analysis.—For the chemical properties and method of detecting this salt, see pp. 77, 78. Chlorate of Potassium. Chlorate of Potash. Chlorate of potassium given in large doses acts as a poison, producing severe vomiting, profuse purging, intense difficulty of breathing, lividity of the countenance, and profound depression of the heart's action.


[103/872 b22652516_0103.jp2]

SULPHATE OF POTASSIUM. SALTS OF BAKIUM. 91 After death, the Mood is found of a chocolate colour, its pigment being destroyed. (' Das Chlorsaure Kali,' by Von Mering, p. 142.) Sulphate of Potassium. Sulphate of Potash. Symptoms and Appearances.—The question whether this should be regarded as an irritant poisonous salt or not was much debated among members of the profession, in reference to a case which was tried in 1843 {Reg. v. Haynes, €. €.. C). The accused had given to the deceased, the night before her death, two ounces of sulphate of potassium dissolved in water; and it was alleged that, a fortnight previously to this, she had taken in divided doses as much as a quarter of a pound of the salt. The woman thought that she was pregnant, but this was disproved by an examination of the body ; and it was charged that the prisoner had given her the salt with the intention of causing a mis- carriage. After the last dose, she was seized with sickness, and died within a very short time. The stomach was found empty, but highly inilamed; and there was blood effused on the brain. One medical witness referred death to the action of the sulphate as an irritant poison; another attributed it to apoplexy as an indirect result of the violent vomiting caused by it. The prisoner was acquitted of the charge of murder, but was subsequently found guilty of administering the substance with intent to procure abortion. Both of the witnesses admitted that, in small doses, the salt was innocent; but that in the dose of two ounces it might produce dangerous effects. Several other fatal cases are recorded. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' Avril, 1842.) There is no -doubt that the most simple purgative salts may, under certain circumstances, and when gi^ien in large doses, destroy life. A case is elsewhere related in which Epsom salts caused death, and gave rise to a criminal charge in this country. (' On Poisons,' 2nd edit. p. 4.) In May, 1875, a woman, set. 27, died in a few hours from the effects of two ounces of Epsom salts taken at once. (' Pharm. Jour.,' June 12, 1875, p. 1001.) It is said that sulphate of potassium has in some cases caused vomitin-g and other serious symptoms, from its containing as impurity sulphate of zinc. This, if present, would be easily discovered by the appropriate tests for zinc (see p. 142, post). Sulphate of potassium may be easily identified. It is in hard dry crystals, soluble in water, forming a neutral solution, in which potassium and sulphuric acid may be discovered by the appropriate tests (see pp. 73, 88). Salts of Barium. Chloride of Barium.—Symptoms.—A woman, set. 22, took, by mistake for Epsom salts, less than a teaspoonful (100 grains) of the chloride. In half an hour there was a feeling of deadly sickness, with sharp burn- ing pains in the stomach and bowels. Vomiting and purging set in violently, the purging being attended with straining. An hour and a half after she had taken the poison the following symptoms were observed. The face was pale and anxious, the eyes deeply sunk, the


[104/872 b22652516_0104.jp2]

POISONING WITH SALTS OF BARIUM. 92 surface cold, the heart's action feeble, the pulse scarcely perceptible, the tongue natural and warm, loss of muscular power, sensation and intelligence unaffected, the pupils natural. Fluids taken were instantly rejected, together with a ropy mucus. There was pain in the stomach, ringing in the ears, twitching of the face, and twisting of the legs and arms. In eight hours and a half the symptoms had abated, but in about fourteen hours the purging had returned, and the symptoms were much worse. There" was a loss of voluntary muscular power. The breathing was slow and laboured, and indicated effusion in the bronchial tubes, but the woman was sensible. In fifteen hours she was convulsed, and these convulsions continued in paroxysms for two hours, when she died, seventeen hours after taking the poison. During the fits she had several watery evacuations, and consciousness was lost. There was no 'post-mortem examination. (' Lancet,' 1859,1, p. 211.) Another instance of death from chloride of barium is reported (' Pharm. Jour.,' Aug. 10, 1872, p. 117); but no account is given of the dose taken, or of the symptoms and appearances. Kennedy states that, in using this compound as a medicine, he has found that few persons are able to bear the eighth of a grain; that it is analogous to corrosive subhmate ; and that an overdose will produce similar effects. He has used it for many years, and he finds the proper dose is from the twelfth to the sixteenth part of a grain; but he cites no instance of its acting as a poison in a dose of one or two grains. (' Lancet,' 1873, ii. p. 28.) Chevallier met with a case in which acetate of barium had been sup- plied in a medicine in place of sulphovinate of sodium. It caused the death of the patient, and produced serious symptoms in the druggist, who had swallowed a portion of the medicine, in order to show that there had been no mistake in its preparation. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1873, 1, p. 395.) Nitrate of barium acts hke the chloride. The chlorate, used in pjTotechny, has acted as a poison. Carbonate of barium is said to have destroyed life in two cases, in each of which only sixty grains was taken; but the following case shows that this compound is not so poisonous as the chloride. A young woman swallowed half a teacupful of the powdered carbonate, mixed with water, at a time when she had been fasting twenty-four hours. There was no particular taste. In two hours she experienced dimness of sight, double vision, ringing in the ears, pain in the head and throbbing in the temples, with a sensation of distension and weight at the pit of the stomach. There was also palpitation of the heart. After a time she complained of pain in the legs and knees, and cramps in the calves. She twice vomited a fiuid like chalk and water. The skin was hot and dry, the pulse frequent, full, and hard. These symptoms gradually abated, and she recovered, although the pain in the head and stomach continued for a long time. ('Med. Gaz.,' xiv. p. 448.) A woman took a mixture of the carbonate and sugar in repeated doses, but in unknown quantity. She died on the second day, having suffered from vomiting, purging, pain, and other symptoms of irritation. On inspection, the mucous membrane of the stomach and


[105/872 b22652516_0105.jp2]

93 POISONING WITH PHOSPHORUS. intestines was inflamed. The carbonate was found in the stomach. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1877, i. p. 888.) This salt is used as a poison for rats and mice. Analysis.—Chloride ofharium crystaUizes in plates, and is soluble in water. 1. The solution yields a white precipitate with sulphuric acid or an alkaline sulphate. This precipitate is insoluble in nitric acid. 2. The powdered salt, burnt on platinum wire in a smokeless flame, imparts to it a greenish-yellow colour. 3. Chlorine may be detected in it by a solution of nitrate of silver. Nitrate of barium reacts like the chloride with sulphuric acid, and imparts a similar green colour to a flame. It also yields the reactions of a nitrate (see nitric acid, p. 78, ante). Carbonate of barium is a white insoluble powder, entirely dissolved with effervescence (carbonic acid) by diluted hydrochloric acid. On evaporation, this solution yields crystalline plates of chloride of barium, which may be tested by the processes above described. CHAPTER 10. PHOSPHOKUS.—RED PHOSPHORUS,—SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES.— CHRONIC POISONING.—CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Poisoning with phosphorus is not uncommon in this country, as the result of accident and suicide; but homicidal poisoning by it is rare. The ordinary yellow or soluble phosphorus is alone poisonous; the red, amorphous, or insoluble, variety has been clearly proved not to be poisonous. It is usually given either in the form of vermin-killer or rat-paste—a mixture of yellow phosphorus, fat, flour, and sugar—or as tips of lucifer matches infused in some liquid. The smell of yellow phosphorus, its taste, the fumes which it gives off, and its luminosity in the dark, commonly reveal its presence. At the Norwich Aut. Ass. 1871 {Reg. v. Fisher), a girl of 18 was convicted of an attempt to poison a family. She put a vermin-compound containing phosphorus into a tea- pot with the tea. When hot water was poured on it, the smell produced at once led to suspicion. Phosphorus was found in the tea, taken from a pot carelessly left about the house. The girl was convicted. Casper described a case in which the luminous appearance of the poisoned food led to a suspicion of poisoning with phosphorus, and this was subsequently proved. A woman put a preparation of phosphorus into some soup, and gave it to her husband. He ate it in a dark room in the presence of some friends, and they noticed that the liquid, as he stirred it, was luminous. (' Vierteljahrsschr. f. Gerichtl. Med.,' July, 1864.) In this way a person may be warned and a life saved. (See / Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1870, 2, p. 203.)


[106/872 b22652516_0106.jp2]

94 PHOSPHORUS SYMPTOMS. Symptoms.—Phosphorus acts as an irritant poison, and also speci- fically. The symptoms of irritation may manifest themselves in a few minutes after the ingestion of the poison. In general, however, there is a longer interval of some hours. In the first instance, the patient experiences a disagreeable taste, resembling that of garlic, which is peculiar to this poison. An alliaceous or garlic-hke odour may be per- ceived in the breath. There is pain and oppression in the region of the stomach, malaise, eructation of phosphoric vapours ha^dng a garHcky odour; and these maybe luminous in the dark. Vomiting is some- times frequent and violent; in other cases quiet and at longer intervals. The abdomen is distended. Purging is not common. The vomited matters are coffee-coloured, or yellow and bilious, and maybe luminous. There is intense thirst. The symptoms may increase in severity, ending in death from collapse in the course of a few hours—four to eight in the worst cases. Nevertheless, in the majority of cases the progress to a fatal termi- nation, though no less sure, is slower and more insidious. The irritant symptoms in a great measure subside; and, though the pulse is feeble and there is a certain amount of malaise, the patient may, to a casual observer, appear to be in an almost normal state of health. But after the lapse of three or four days, jaundice sets in and rapidly increases ; there is great prostration of strength ; the abdomen becomes distended ; the liver is observed to be greatly enlarged, and vomiting of altered blood may come on, with intense thirst; the skin is cold; the pulse feeble, rapid, and perhaps imperceptible at the wrist; the urine is scanty and high-coloured, and contains casts from the kidneys. The fseces, previously suppressed, are now more abundant and contain blood. Coma sets in, with jactitation of the limbs, or muscular twitch- ings; and the patient succumbs, generally five or six days after the administration of the poison. A female, set. 20, took several doses of phosphorus-paste; the first on the evening of Jan. 11, 1877. The dose was repeated twice on the 12th. The quantity of paste taken was of the size of a large cob- nut, containing about two grains of phosphorus. On the morning of the 13th she retched, and at midday her appetite failed at dinner, and in the evening she vomited. At 10 p.m. on the 14th she was first seen by Tyson, about seventy-two hours after the first, and forty-eight hours after the last dose was taken. She had then an excited aspect, and her breath had a phosphoric odour. There was tenderness over the region of the stomach. On the 15th there was faint yellowness of the conjunctivae of the eyes, slight pain in the stomach, and nausea, but no vomiting. The urine was high-coloured and turbid. On the 16th there was decided jaundice, great thirst, and prostration. There was still a slight garlicky odour of the breath; but the urine and fseces showed no luminosity. There was no obvious enlargement of either the liver or the spleen. On the 17th the liver was enlarged ; only a very little dark-coloured urine was passed; and there was much epigastric pain and tenderness. In the evening there was slight dehrium. From this time she gradually sank, and died on the 18th,


[107/872 b22652516_0107.jp2]

95 PHOSPHORUS. CHRONIC POISONING. nearly a week after the administration of the first dose of the poison. On post-mortem examination, the liver was found to be of the usual size, but it had undergone extensive fatty degeneration, as had the heart also. There was no marked appearance in the stomach, which was almost filled with a blackish syrupy liquid. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1877, xxii. p. 452.) In 1876 a woman, and her daughter set. 5, each drank some phosphorus-paste in warm water. The woman was seen four days later, apparently in her usual health. Subsequently she sickened, became jaundiced, and died, a week after the poison was swallowed. The child exhibited no symptoms till 7 a.m. on the day after taking the poison. She then vomited some slimy material, and her breath had a garlicky odour. In a few hours she was in a state of semi- collapse. Next day she became drowsy, then thirsty, restless, and vomited constantly. There was no jaundice. She died fifty-nine hours after the administration of the poison. On post-mortem exami- nation, the heart was found to have undergone fatty degeneration, and it and the aorta exhibited ecchymosed patches. The stomach was con- siderably injected, and its surface was thickly coated with tenacious mucus. The small intestine was much congested at its commence- ment, and to a less degree lower down. The liver weighed twenty-six ounces, was yellow, anaemic, and showed extreme fatty degeneration, except in isolated patches. In neither of these cases could the dose of phosphorus taken be ascertained. ('Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1877, xxii. p. 449.) Chronic poisoning. Pliosphorus-vapour.—Chronic poisoning by phosphorus is accompanied by nauseous eructations, frequent vomiting, a sense of heat in the stomach, purging, straining, pains in the joints, wasting, hectic fever, and disease of the stomach, under which the patient slowly sinks. Some interest is attached to the chronic form of poisoning with phosphorus from the researches of Strohl and others on the effects of the vapour upon persons engaged in the manu- facture of phosphorus or lucifer matches. It has been remarked that such persons have suffered from necrosis* of the jaw, carious teeth, and abscesses. There has been also great irritation of the respiratory organs, and bronchitis has frequently s&own itself among them. (See * Ox Poisons,' 2nd edit. p. 345.) Cases of chronic phosphorus-poison- ing are now of great rarity, owing to the precautions adopted among workers in phosphorus to prevent the introduction of the poison into the system. The fumes of phosphorus pills may cause necrosis. Appearances.—Among the appearances produced by phosphorus are marks of irritation and inflammation in the stomach and intestines. The stomach has been found much contracted, and its mucous mem- brane inflamed, occasionally softened, and presenting purple or violet- coloured spots. In one fatal case the body was found in a state of great muscular rigidity. The membranes of the brain were congested, and there was serous effusion between them. The substance of the brain was also congested. The heart was flaccid and nearly empty. The mucous membrane of the stomach, gullet, and small intestines


[108/872 b22652516_0108.jp2]

PHOSPHORUS. APPEARANCES. 96 was very red, and there were patches in which the membrane was destroyed. When the stomach was opened, a white vapour escaped, accompanied by a strong smell of phosphorus. This organ contained a table-spoonful of a viscid greenish matter, from which particles of phosphorus with some Prussian blue (used as a colouring for the phos- phorus-paste) subsided on standing. ('Lancet,' 1857, i. p. 600.) The mucous membrane has been found raised in small bladders or vesica- tions, but this appearance was probably owing to putrefaction, as the body was not examined imtil twenty-three days after death. Schu- chardt describes the blood as dark and fluid, and it does not become red on exposure to the air. Ecchymoses are sometimes found on the skin, on the surfaces of various organs, and on the lining membrane of the aorta. (' Brit, and For. Med. Rev.,' 1857, vol. 19, p. 506; ' Jour, de Chim. Med.,' 1857, p. 84.) The most remarkable appearance met with in the acute form of poisoning is fatty degeneration of the voluntary muscles and other organs. In the case of a girl, set. 13, who died on the sixth day after taking phosphorus-paste beaten up with egg, there were the usual symptoms, with severe paroxysms of vomiting and pain. The matters first vomited were observed to be luminous in the dark. There were numerous ecchymosed patches in the cellular tissue of the skin of the abdomen over the rectus muscle; these were also seen on the chest and on the diaphragm. The stomach contained a dark-coloured thick fluid, hke altered blood; the coats were not inflamed; and the surface of the inner coat was covered with a brownish-coloured mucus which had no odour of phosphorus. At the greater curvature the smface was dotted over with numerous small dark particles, consisting of coagula of altered blood adhering to the membrane, but easUy removed from it. They had the appearance of efiused coagula of blood, in petechial spots. The contents of the stomach owed their colour to these little masses of blood being disseminated through them. The duodenum contained a similar liquid. The intestines presented no abnormal appearance. The liver was in an advanced state of fatty degeneration. This condition of the liver has occurred so frequently in cases of phosphorus-poisoning that it may be regarded as one of the characteristic appearances. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1868, p. 242.) In a case recorded by Habershon (' Med. Chir. Trans.,' 1857, vol. 50, p. 87), in which a woman died on the fifth day, the symptoms and appearances were similar to those above described. The phosphorus was taken in the form of paste, and it is supposed in a dose of from three to four grains. There was much ecchymosis in patches in and about the cellular tissue of the abdomen and chest. There was fatty degeneration of the liver and kidneys. The stomach contained a large quantity of fluid, like soot and water, and was covered with a tenacious bloody mucus. There was some con- gestion in the mucous membrane, and there was much redness with ecchymosis in the small intestines. The fatty degeneration induced by phosphorus is usually most marked in the liver, though it may extend to the kidneys, the heart, the glands of the stomach, to the muscular tissue generally, and to the arterioles and capillaries. The


[109/872 b22652516_0109.jp2]

PHOSPHORUS. FATAL DOSE. ANALYSTS. 97 editor has seen considerable enlargement of the liver produced within forty-eight hours of the time at which the poison was administered. The liver is usually enlarged, doughy, anaemic, and of uniform yellow or yellowish-white colour. The acini are distinct. Wagner describes an interlobular hypertrophy of the connective tissue, The hepatic cells are loaded with fat. The heart and muscles generally may be soft, yellow, and of defective tenacity. In place of transverse striae, innumerable fat-globules and granules of fat are seen with the micro- scope. The glandular epithelial cells of the gastric follicles, and the cortex of the kidneys, may be filled with fat-globules. Occasionally the liver is of a deep yellow colour, alternating with reddish patches, simulating acute yellow atrophy of the organ. The viscera and the flesh of animals recently poisoned by phosphorus have the peculiar odour of this substance, and if the case is recent they are luminous in the dark, (Galtier, 'Toxicol.,' vol. 1, p. 184.) In the case of a woman who died while taking phosphorus medicinally, it was remarked that the whole of the organs were luminous; thus indicating the diffusion of this poison by absorption. (Casper's ' Wochenschr.,' 1846, pp. 115, 135.) Fatal dose.—That phosphorus is a powerful poison is proved by two cases quoted by Christison. In one, death was caused by a grain and a half in twelve days; in the other, by two grains in about eight days. The smallest fatal dose met with is in a case quoted by Galtier. A v/oman, aet. 52, took in divided doses, in four days, rather less than one grain of dissolved phosphorus. The largest dose taken at once, i.e. on the fourth day, is stated to have been half a grain. Symptoms of pain and irritation appeared, and the patient died in three days. The gullet, stomach, and small intestines were found much inflamed. (' Toxicol.,' vol. 1, p. 87.) When the phosphorus is dissolved in a Hquid, or when it is finely divided, as in phosphorus-paste or in lucifer-matches, its action is then more powerful, as it is in a state well fitted for absorption. In general several days elapse ^efore a case proves fatal. Orfila met with one which terminated fatalfy in four hours, and Habershon quotes a case which is said to have pfoved fatal in half an hour. (' Med. Chir. Trans.,' 1867, vol. 50, p. 92.) This is the most rapid case on record. Chemical Analysis.—^Yellow phosphorus is a solid of waxy consis- tency, having a peculiar odour, an4 a taste resembling garhc. It is the odour and taste which prevent it from being criminally employed as a poison, and render it easy of detection in articles of food. It evolves a white vapour in daylight, and a faint blueish luminosity in the dark. It melts and takes fire at a temperature of 112° F., burning with a bright yellow flame, and producing white, opaque, acid vapours. It is not soluble in water, but it is dissolved by alcohol, ether, chloroform, and oils ; and especially by disulphide of carbon. The smell which phosphorus imparts to solids and liquids is charac- teristic. When it has been taken in a solid form the particles may sonjetinies be separated g-s ;a sediment, by washing the contents of the H


[110/872 b22652516_0110.jp2]

98 AMORPHOUS PHOSPHATE. stomacli with water. These may be melted under water into one mass, either by plunging the tube containing them into hot water, or by pour- ing hot water upon them in a glass. If a portion of the organic liquid is evaporated to dryness in the dark, the particles of phosphorus will be easily recognized by their luminosity, as well as by their combustion when the surface on which the material is spread is heated. Owing to its great solubility in disulphide of carbon, phosphorus may be sepa- rated from many organic matters by digestion with this liquid. It is thus procured from flour and phosphorus-paste, or from the residue of the contents of the stomach after washing and decantation. On the spontaneous evaporation of the disulphide, decanted from the organic liquid or solid, the phosphorus may be procured in small globules or beads. These ignite when touched with a hot wire, and burn with the bright flame of phosphorus. Its vapour blackens nitrate of silver. If the phosphorus is in a state of solution, or is in too small quantity to be dissolved out of the material by disulphide of carbon, its presence may be indicated by distilling the liquid containing it in the dark. The vapour appears luminous as it is condensed in a glass condensing- tube. So delicate is this process of distillation, which was first sug- gested by Mitscherlich, that in one experiment with the head of a single lucifer-match the luminosity appeared for half an hour in the condensing-tube. Absolute darkness is required for the success of this experiment. When taken in the form of matches, portions of sulphur, vermilion, or Prussian blue may be found in the sediment. The substance known undfer the name of red or amorphous jphos- phorus is not possessed of poisonous properties. This fact, long since announced by Liebig, has been confirmed by experiments, which, how- ever, need revision. It has been given to animals in doses of thirty grains without causing symptoms of poisoning. In 1860 a woman, set. 26, swallowed the composition scraped from a number of lucifer-matches made with amorphous phosphorus. She suffered no inconvenience. She procured other matches of common phosphorus, took a decoction of them in cofiee, and died from the effects^ Amorphous phosphorus is easily recognized by its red colour and infusibflity at the temperature of boiling water. When a mixture con- taining it is heated to about 500° F., it burns like common phosphorus, and yields similar products. It is insoluble in all liquids, and by its insolubility in disulphide of carbon it is distinguished and separated from common phosphoi'us. It has neither colour nor taste, and is not luminous in the dark.


[111/872 b22652516_0111.jp2]

ARSENIC. ACUTE POISONING. METALLIC IRKITANTS. 99 CHAPTER 11. AKSENIO.—ARSENIOUS ACID.— SYMPTOMS.— CHRONtC POISONING. APPEAR- ANCES AFTER DtEATH.—FATAL DOSE.—CHEMtCAL ANALYSIS.—ARSENITES.— ARSENIC ACID.—ORPIMENT AND OTHER COMPOUNDS. W7iite Arsenica Arsenious Acid.—This substance, when freshly pre- pared by sublimation, exists in the form of vitreous or glassy arsenic in semi-transparent white masses, which gradually become opaque on exposure to air and light. More commonly it is met with in conimerce as the white arsenic or arsenic of shops, in the form of a white powder, not unlike flour in appearance, but visibly crystalline when examined with a lens. It is almost tasteless, and hence may be readily introduced unperceived, and in large quantities, into most ordinary articles of food and drink. It is sparingly soluble in cold water, a wineglassful of which will dissolve about a fatal dose; but it is much more soluble in many other liquids. Arsenic, as it is sold to the public in small quantities, is required to be mixed either with 1-16th part of its weight of soot, which gives to it a greyish colour, or with l-32nd part of its weight of indigo, and then it is blue. Sometimes, in place of indigo, ultramarine is improperly employed as a colouring. When ultramarine is used, the article is decolorized by all acid liquids, and by the gastric juice. Symptoms of Acute Poisoning.—The symptoms produced by this poison vary according to the form and dose in which it has been ad- ministered. The time at which they usually come on is generally in from half an hour to an hour after the poison has,been swallowed; but they may appear earlier or much later. In a case in which sixty grains of white arsenic had been taken on an empty stomach, no symptoms appeared for two hours; in another, that occurred to Lachese, in which a large dose was taken, there were no symptoms for seven hours. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1837, vol. 1, p. 344. See also 'Med. Chir. Eev.,' 1854, p. 294.) And in a third their appearance was protracted for ten hours. The maximum period yet known is eighteen hours. (Seidel.) In all cases in which arsenic enters the system from without, as by its appli- cation to the skin, or to ulcerated or diseased surfaces, the symptoms are rarely manifested until after the lapse of some hours or even days. The person first experiences a feeling of sinking or faintness, depres- sion, nausea followed by sickness, with an intense burning pain in the region of the stomach, usually but not invariably increased by pressure. The pain in the abdomen becomes more and more severe; and there is violent vomiting of a brown turbid matter, mixed with mucus, and some- times streaked with blood. These symptoms are followed by purging, which is more or less violent, and this is generally accompanied by severe


[112/872 b22652516_0112.jp2]

ARSENIC. CHRONIC POISONING. TOO cramps in the calves of the legs. At the trial of Mrs. Maybrick (Reg. V. Florence Mayhrick, Liverpool Sum. Ass., 1889) the absence of cramps in the calves and tenderness at the pit of the stomach was asserted to negative the conclusion that the deceased died from arsenic; but the prisoner was convicted. The matters discharged from the stomach and bowels have had in some instances a yellowish colour, as it was supposed, from a partial conversion of the poison into sulphide, but more probably from an admixture of bile. The vomited matters are in some cases coloured with blood, and the mixture of blood with bile has often given to them a green, yellow, or brown colour. In other cases they may consist of a large quantity of mucus ejected in a flaky state and having a milky- white appearance, as if from admixture with the poison. The colour of the vomited matters may be blue or black when coloured arsenic has been taken; or the admixture of bile may render them of a deep- green colour. The vomiting is in general violent and incessant, and is excited by any liquid or solid taken into the stomach. There is tenes- mus (straining), and the discharges by the bowels are frequently tinged with blood. There is a sense of constriction, with a feehng of burning heat in the throat, commonly accompanied by the most intense thirst. The pulse is small, very frequent, irregular, and sometimes wholly imperceptible. The skin is cold and clammy in the stage of collapse; at other times it is very hot. The respiration is painful from the tender state of the stomach. There is great restlessness, but before death stupor sometimes supervenes, with paralysis, tetanic convulsions, or spasms in the muscles of the extremities. In one instance trismus (lock-jaw) appeared in three-quarters of an hour. (Orfila.) In another, severe and prolonged nervous symptoms, among the most prominent of which were epileptoid fits. (Marshall.) Although pain is in general among the early and well-marked symptoms, arsenic appears in some cases to destroy sensibihty. In a case in which the stomach was found intensely inflamed after death, the patient complained of no pain during the time which she survived. In some cases purging is absent. Should the patient live for a few days, paralysis is a not uncommon symptom, due to neuritis like that met with in chronic alcoholism. Melanosis has been rarely observed. (' Correspondenzbl. f. Schweizer Aertze,' 1890, No. 15.) Chronic Poisoning.—Should the person recover from the first effects, and the case be protracted, or should the dose have been small and administered at intervals, there will be tarsal irritation, inflammation of the conjunctivse, with suffusion of the eyes, and intolerance of light— conditions which are, however, often present among the early symptoms above described. There is also irritation of the skin, accompanied by a vesicular eruption, which has been called eczema arsenicale. Some- times this has assumed the form of nettle-rash or of the eruption attending scarlet fever. These conditions may, however, not all be present. Local paralysis, preceded by numbness or tingling in the fingers and toes, and other s3'mptoms of nervous disorder, are also common consequences. Exfoliation of the cuticle and skin of the tongue, and falling off of the hair, have likewise been witnessed.


[113/872 b22652516_0113.jp2]

POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES. Id Salivation has been observed to follow, especially when small doses of the poison have been given for a length of time. ('Med. Gaz.,' vol. xvi., p. 790.) Strangury and jaundice have been noticed among the secondary symptoms. (Marshall on Arsenic, pp. 44, 111.) At Hyeres, ill 1888, an alarming outbreak of arsenical poisoning occurred, the poison having been accidentally introduced into wine, which was drunk by many persons for a considerable time. The symptoms at the outset were those of dyspepsia, with nausea, vomiting, and purging; but nausea and vomiting were not invariable. The gastro-intestinal symptoms generally disappeared in a few days. There was dryness of the mouth, loss of appetite, a sense of constriction at the pit of the stomach, and wasting. Bronchial irritation was marked, with scanty secretion of mucus. There were pains in the limbs and oedema of the joints. The patellar reflexes were weakened or abolished. "Wandering pains were felt in various regions, and headache, and the sense of touch was diminished. A garlicky taste was felt in the mouth, but the sense of taste was not diminished* The vision was disturbed, and the con- junctiva of the eye was inflamed. There were scaly eruptions on both surfaces of the hands and feet. Of 63 reported cases, 30 were slight, 18 serious, and 15 fatal. Arsenic is not an accumulative poison; it is temporarily deposited in the organs after absorption, but is rapidly eliminated by the urine; and in from two to three weeks, if the person survives, the whole of that which has been absorbed may be removed from the body. Occasionally arsenic may be detected in the organs, especially the bones, after a longer period* R. C. Maclagan states that he has found it passing out of the body by the urine as early as three quarters of an hour after it had been taken. (' Ed. Med. Jour.,' 1864, 11. p. 200.) Appearances after Death.—The principal changes produced by arsenic are generall}'" confined to the stomach and bowels. They are commonly well marked in proportion to the largeness of the dose, and the length of time that the person has survived after taking the poison. Attention must be first directed to the stomach. Arsenic seems to have a specific effect on this organ; for, by whatever channel the poison may havc- entered into the system, whether through a wounded, diseased, or ulcerated surface, or by the act of swallowing, or when mtroduced into the rectum or vagina, the stomach has been found inflamed. The mucous membrane of the stomach is sometimes partly detached, and is covered with a layer of mucus, mixed with blood or bile, and with a thick white pasty-looking substance containing arsenic. It is com- monly found red and inflamed in dotted or striated patches, extending between the two apertures : the colour, which is of a dull or brownish red, becomes brighter on exposure to the air; at other times it is of a deep crimson hue, interspersed with black-looking lines or patches of altered blood. The redness is usually most strongly marked at the greater end of the stomach: in one case it may be found spread over the whole mucous surface, giving to it the appearance of red velvet; in another it will be chiefly seen on the prominences or folds of the membrane. In one instance the coats were thickened and of a gelati-


[114/872 b22652516_0114.jp2]

I02 ARSENIC. POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES. nous consistency, without any marked inflammatory redness. The stomach has been found highly inflamed in a case which proved fatal in two hours. Thus it would appear that intense inflammation of the mucous membrane may be observed within a very short period. This organ usuallj^ contains a mucous liquid of a dark colour tinged with blood. The coats are sometimes thickened in patches, being raised up into a sort of tumour, with arsenic embedded in' them; at other times they have been found thinned. The mucous membrane is rarely found ulcerated, and still more rarely gangrenous. Ulceration of the membrane, as the result of the action of arsenic, has been found as early as ten hours after the poison had been taken. Perforation of the coats is not a common result of arsenical poisoning: there are but few instances on record. Murray Thomson met with a case in which there was on the inner coat of the stomach a patch, black and hardened, as large as the palm of the hand. Various appearances are said to have been met with in the lungs, heart, brain, and urinary organs; but they are not so characteristic of arsenical poisoning as to admit of medico-legal use in enabhng a medical man to distinguish poisoning from disease. It is to the stomach and intestines that he must look as the basis of reliable evidence in regard to appearances after death. Wilks has pointed out an ecchymosed condition of the lining membrane of the left ventricle of the heart in cases of acute poisoning by arsenic ; and this condition may be associated with a general punctated eccliymosis of the pleura and peritoneum. The editor has seen the serous membranes generally presenting an appearance as if they had been sprinkled over with minute drops of blood; this condition being due to minute sub-serous extravasation of blood. In a few instances the mouth, throat, and gullet have been found inflamed ; but in general there are no changes in these parts to attract particular attention. The mucous membrane of the small intestines may be inflamed throughout; but commonly the in- flammatory redness is confined to the upper part, i.e. the duodenum, especially to that portion of it which joins the stomach. Of the large intestines, the rectum appears to be the most prone to inflammation. In the case reported by Murray Thomson the intestines were normal, though the stomach was bright red and inflamed, with arsenic adherent to it. The liver, spleen, and kidneys present no appearances which can be connected with the action of arsenic, except occasional fatty degene- ration {Beg. V. Webster, Ed. High Ct. of Just., Feb. 1891), althougli these, like the other soft organs, may become receptacles of the absorbed poison. It is worthy of observation, in relation to the known antiseptic properties of arsenic, that the parts especially affected by this poison (the stomach and intestines) occasionally retain the well-marked characters of irritant poisoning for a long time after death. Absorbed arsenic does not, however, appear to prevent the decomposition of the soft organs in which it is deposited. That putrefaction is frequently retarded or arrested in the bodies of those poisoned by arsenic is generally admitted, and this may result in mummification. Schauenstein, however, does not consider that retardation of putrefaction is proved, and still less mummifi- cation. We entertain no doubt as to the retardation, and mummification


[115/872 b22652516_0115.jp2]

ACTION THEOUGH THE SKIN. FATAL DOSE. I03 appears also to be a well-established fact. (See Kornfeld in Friedreich's ' Blatter fiir Gerichtl. Med.,' 1885, p. 149.) A peculiar yellow pigment is often observed in the intestines of bodies exhumed after arsenical poisoning. This has usually been ascribed to the formation of yellow sulphide of arsenic (orpiment). It may be due to this pigment, but Campbell Brown is of opinion that it is due to a peculiar alteration of the pigments of the bile. (' Lancet,' 1884, i. p. 421; ' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1884, i. p. 600.) Action of Arsenic through the Skin.—Arsenic may destroy life as the result of external application to the skin, to any diseased or ulcerated surface, or to a wound. (' Guy's Hosp. Kep.,' 1864, p. 220.) Some importance is attached to this form of arsenical poisoning from the fact that the lives of many infants were, in 1878, destroyed by the use of a powder sold under the name of violet powder. Instead of employing pure starch in the manufacture of this powder, some makers have recommended as a substitute terra alba, or powdered gypsum. In the Bradford lozenge case ('On Poisons,' 3rd edit., p. 354), arsenic had been substituted for terra alba, and caused the deaths of many infants by external application. In twenty-eight cases in which this powder had been used to infants, there were twelve or thirteen deaths. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1878, i. p. 795.) It set up inflammation and irrita- tion in the skin, and was then absorbed. In one case the child was washed and then dusted over with this poisoned powder, which was also applied to its genital organs. On the second day after birth the powder was applied four times. There was at this time an unnatural redness of the skin. On the third day the skin was intensely red, and appeared unhealthy about the navel and vagina. The powder was then with- drawn, but the eruption became worse, and in some parts, the skin had a sloughy appearance. On the tenth day of the child's life, and'on the sixth day from the last application of the powder, the child died from the effects of the absorbed poison. On a post-mortem examination there was nothing remarkable in the condition of the viscera. The body was buried, but exhumed twenty-one days after death for examination. Tidy found in the liver 1*5 grain of arsenic, in the stomach and intes- tines one grain, and in the kidneys traces. The powder used, which should have consisted of starch and magnesia, with orris root, contained 38*5 per cent, of white arsenic, with starch and magnesia. (' Lancet,' 1878, ii. p. 250.) For one of the deaths thus caused the vendor of the powder was tried on a charge of manslaughter {Reg. v. King, C. C. C, 1878), but acquitted; and it was thus decided that there was no criminal neglect or culpable ignorance in a drysalter not being able to distinguish arsenic from plaster of Paris. It was simply a case of caveat emptor. (' Pharm. Jour.,' Aug. 1878, p. 119.) The smallest fatal dose of arsenic hitherto recorded is two grains. (' Prov. Med. Jour.,' 1848, p. 347 ; also ' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 39, p. 116.) Under circumstances favourable to the operation of this poison, the fatal dose in an adult may be assigned at from tim to three grains, though one grain may perhaps kill. The editor has seen a case of arsenical poisoning in which repeated three-quarter grain doses of white


[116/872 b22652516_0116.jp2]

104 ARSENIC. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. arsenic, given with homicidal intent, were followed, after the usual symptoms, by general paralysis, beginning in the lower extremities, and gradually creeping upwards till the lower intercostal and other respiratory muscles were affected. Large doses of arsenic commonly destroy life in from eighteen hours to three days. The average time at which death fakes place is twenty-four hours; but the poison may destroy life within a much shorter period. In one case death took place in two hours and a half. ('Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1851, 183. See also ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1837, Vol. 1, p. 339.) Foster met with the case of a child under three years of age, that from the effects of arsenic died within two hours. Finlay met with a case which proved fatal in one hour. (' Lancet,' 1883, ii. p. 943.) One (a doubtful) case is said to have proved fatal in twenty minutes. On the other hand, life is occasionally protracted for many days. In 1847, a man who had swallowed 220 gi-ains of arsenic was admitted into Guy's Hospital, and died on the seventh day^ In the Case of Dr. Alexander, death took place on the sixteenth day; and though a large quantity of arsenic had been taken, no traces were found in the body. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1857, i. p. 389.) In an instance in which arsenic was applied externally to the head, the person did not die until the twentieth day. Chemical Analysis.—Arsenic as a solid.—In the simple state, white arsenic may be identified by the following properties:—1. A small quantity of the powder, placed on platinum-foil, is entirely volatihzed at a moderate heat (about 400° F.). If a small portion of the white powder is very slowly heated in a glass tube of narrow bore, it will be sublimed without melting, and form a ring of minute octahedral and tetrahedral crystals, remarkable for their lustre and brilhancy. Under a microscope the appearance of these crystals is highly characteristic (Fig. 4). 2. On boiling a small quantity of the powder in distilled water, it is not readily dissolved, but it partly floats in a sort of film, while a part becomes aggregated in small lumps at the bottom of the vessel. It re- quires long boiling, in order that it should become dissolved and equally diffused through water. 3. It is not perceptibly altered in colour when moistened with a weak solution of sulphide of ammonium. 4. When a small portion of the white powder, i.e. from one-fourth to one-twentieth part of a grain, is heated with two parts of soda-flux (obtained by incinerating acetate or tartrate of sodium in a closed vessel) in a glass tube about three inches long and from one-eighth to a quarter of an inch in diameter, it is decomposed : a ring of metaUic arsenic of Crystals of Arseiiious Acid by sublima- tion, magnified 30 diameters.


[117/872 b22652516_0117.jp2]

REDUCTION PROCESS. an iron-grey colour is sublimed and deposited in a cool part of the tube. In place of soda-flux a mixture of one part of cyanide of potassium with three parts of dry (anhydrous) carbonate of sodium may be employed. During the reduction there is a perceptible odour, resembhng that of garhc, which is possessed by metallic arsenic only while passing from a state of vapour to arsenious acid. In this experiment of reduction, there are frequently two rings deposited in the tube—the upper and larger ring has a brown colour, and appears to be a mixture of finely divided metallic arsenic and arsenious oxide ; the lower ring is small, and consists of the pure metal. The appearances presented by these sublimates is indicated in the annexed illustration (Fig. 5). By Fig. 5. Reduction-tube, with two sublimates: the upper, brownish black; the lower, the pure metal in an annular deposit. heating gently the tube containing the sublimate (reduced to powder) in another tube of larger diameter, the metallic arsenic, during volati- lization, forms octahedral and tetrahedral crystals of arsenious acid, which, after examination by the microscope, may be dissolved in a few drops of water, and tested by one or two more of the liquid reagents. The metallic sublimates, or the crystals produced from them, may be further subjected to the following process. Break the glass on which the sublimate is deposited into fragments, and digest these in a few drops of the strong nitric acid, previously proved to be free from arsenic. The sublimate is thereby converted into arsenic acid. The acid solution should be evaporated to dryness, and the white residue obtained dissolved in a few drops of distilled water, and a strong solution of nitrate or of ammonio-nitrate of silver added in small quantity to the residue. A brick-red coloration indicates arsenic acid, and thus proves incontestably that the sublimate was of an arsenical nature. The upper or brownish-looking sublimate may be readily converted into one of the metal, by gentlj^ heating it in the flame of a spirit-lamp. Arsenious acid is then volatilized, and an iron-grey deposit of the less volatile metallic acid appears. If the heat is continued, the whole of the metallic sublimate is volatilized and deposited in a cool part of the tube, in transparent and colourless octahedra of arsenious acid. This is the special character of an arsenical sublimate; it may be thus dis- tinguished from sublimates of all metals or metalloids. The lower metallic sublimate procured by reduction sometimes presents itself, not in an annular form, but in detached particles of an irregular spherical shape. These are of an iron-grey colour, quite unlike sub- limed mercury, and, when examined with the microscope, it may be seen that they consist of crystalline nucleated masses, and that they are not accurately spherical. This sublimate is frequently produced in the last stage, when the residue in the tube is strongly heated. The process


[118/872 b22652516_0118.jp2]

io6 TESTS FOR ARSENIC IN SOLUTION. of reduction, with the corroborative results above mentioned, is, when thus applied, conclusive of the arsenical nature of the substance under examination. 5. A solution of stannous chloride is mixed with its volume of fuming hydrochloric acid and brought to the boiling point. If the hydrochloric acid is pure, it should remain colourless, but if it contains a trace of arsenic, the liquid will acquire a light-brown colour. On adding a minute quantity of solid arsenious oxide to such a mixture, the oxide is dissolved and instantly decomposed, metallic arsenic being deposited in the form of a brown or brownish-black precipitate. A salt of antimony is not thus affected. Arsenic in solution in Water. Liquid Tests.—The solution of arsenious acid is clear, colourless, possesses scarcely any perceptible taste, and has but a feeble acid re- F'g- 6- action. In this state we should first evaporate slowly a few drops on a glass slide, when a crystalline deposit will be obtained. On examining this with a microscope, it will be found to consist of numerous minute octahe- dral crystals, presenting triangular surfaces when viewed by reflected light (see Fig. 6). 1. Silver Test.—On adding to the solution of white arsenic ammonia- nitrate of silver, a pale yellow pre- cipitate of arsenite of silver falls. The test is made by adding to a strong Crystals of Arsenious Acid from a soiu- Solution of nitrate of silver a weak tion, magnified 124 diameters. solution of ammonia, and continuing to add the latter until the brown oxide of silver, at first thrown down, is almost redissolved. The yellow precipitate is soluble in nitric and acetic acids, as well as in ammonia. 2. Copper Test.—On adding to another portion of the solution ammonio-sulphate of copper, a light-green precipitate (arsenite of copper) is formed, the tint of which varies according to the proportion of arsenic present, and the quantity of the test added; hence, if the arsenic is in small proportion, no green precipitate at first appears, and the liquid simply acquires a blue colour from the test. In less than an hour, if arsenic is present, a bright-green deposit is formed, which may be easily separated from the blue liquid by decantation. This test is made by adding ammonia to a weak solution of sulphate of copper, until the blueish-white precipitate at first produced is nearly redissolved. It should not be used in large quantity if concentrated, as the deep blue colour tends to obscure or conceal the green precipitate formed. The dried precipitate of arsenite of copper, when slowly and moderately heated in a well-dried reduction-tube, will yield a ring of octahedral crystals of arsenious oxide.


[119/872 b22652516_0119.jp2]

marsh's process. 3. Sulphuretted Hydrogen Test.—The gas procured by adding to ferrous sulphide, in a proper apparatus, a mixture of one part of strong sulphuric acid and eight parts of water, is washed by passing it through a little water made faintly alkaline with soda. The arsenical liquid should be slightly acidulated with pure diluted hydrochloric acid, hefore the gas is passed into it. A yellow precipitate of sulphide is produced if arsenic is present; and it may be collected by subsidence. It is known to be sulphide of arsenic by the following properties : 1. It is insoluble in water, alcohol, and ether, as well as in diluted hydrochloric acid; but it is decomposed by strong nitric and nitro-hydrochloric acids. 2. It is immediately dissolved by potash, soda, or ammonia, forming, if no organic matter is present, a colourless solution : also by sulphide of ammonium. 3. When dried and heated with three parts of soda- flux, or an equal part of dry cyanide of potassium, it yields a sublimate of metallic arsenic. 4. Marsh's Process. Nascent Hydrogen T<s^f.—The action of this test depends on the decomposition of arsenious acid and its soluble compounds by nascent hydrogen, evolved from the action of diluted sulphuric or hydrochloric acid on zinc. The materials should always be first proved to be free from arsenic. The apparatus used is so well known as to need no description or illustration. The arsenic may be introduced in the state of powder; but it is far better to dissolve it in water by boiling, either with or without the addition of a few drops of hydrochloric acid. The arsenic combines with the hydrogen, forming arsenetted hydrogen gas, which possesses the following properties :—1. Filter-paper wetted with a solution of nitrate of silver is immediately blackened by the gas, and lead-paper is not changed in colour. 2. It burns with a pale blueish-white flame, and thick white smoke (arsenious acid) is evolved. 3. A slip of glass or of white porcelain held in the flame near the point (for not too long a time) acquires a dark stain from the deposit of metallic arsenic upon it. This deposit presents a metallic lustre in the centre (Fig. 7, a), a white film of arsenious acid on the outside (c), and between the two a dark ring of a pul- verulent substance (b), which, when viewed by transmitted hght, is hair-brown in colour towards the margin, but opaque in^ the centre. In order to determine the arsenical nature of the deposits, the following plan may be adopted. Several of the deposits should be received and accumulated in small porcelain capsules, held in the flame of the burning gas. To one, add a solution of chlorinated soda: the arsenical deposit is immediately dissolved. To a second, add a solution of sulphide of ammonium: the metallic deposit is detached, but not perfectly dissolved; and on evapora- Fig. 7. Deposit obtained by Marsh's Apparatus. A, Metal. B, Mixed deposit. C, Arsenious Acid.


[120/872 b22652516_0120.jp2]

io8 ARSENIC. REINSCH's PROCESS. tion it yields a pale yellow film of sulphide of arsenic. To a third, add a few drops of the strong nitric acid. The deposit is dissolved. Evaporate the acid solution gently to dryness, carefully neutralize the residue with ammonia, and add one or two drops of a solution of nitrate of silver: a brick-red stain or a dark-red precipitate of arsenate of silver will be producedi 5. Reinseh's Process.—In the application of this process, the liquid suspected to contain arsenic, or the solid dissolved in distilled water, is boiled with from one-sixth to one-eighth its bulk of pure hydrochloric acid (proved to be free from arsenic), and a small slip of pure copper is then introduced. A slip of polished copper-foil (electrolytic copper) about a quarter of an inch square, attached to the end of a thin platinum wire, may be employed for the experiment. The copper must be first proved to be free from arsenic, as this is a very common contamination of all commercial copper in the form of foil, gau^e, or wire^ Copper of a high degree of purity is, however, now a commercial article. If arsenic is present in the liquid, even in small quantity, the pohshed copper acquires, either immediately or within a few minutes, a dark iron-grey coating from the deposit of this metal. This is apt to scale off if the arsenic is in large quantity, or if the liquid is very acid or long boiled. Remove the slip of copper, wash it in water, dry it, and gently heat it in a small reduction-tube, when arsenious oxide will be subhmed in minute octahedral or tetrahedral crystals; if these should not be apparent ffom one piece of copper, several may be successively introduced. When the quantity of arsenic is small, the pohshed copper merely acquires a faint blue or greyish tint; The deposit is in all cases materially affected by the degree of dilution, and some- times it will appear only after the liquid has been much concentrated by evaporation. The presence of arsenic as an impurity in copper may be detected by the following method suggested by Abel. Add to pure hydrochloric acid, diluted with six parts of water, one or two drops of a weak solution of ferric chloride. Boil the acid hquid and introduce the copper, well cleaned and polished, into the boiling liquid. Arsenical copper soon acquires a dark tarnish, while the non-arsenical copper retains its red colour under these circumstances; Arsenic in liquids containing organic matter.—Arsenic may exist in an insoluble form—i.e. as a crystalline powder—in the contents of the stomach or any liquid article of food. If coarsely powdered, it may be separated as a heavy sediment, by careful washing with distilled water, and then dried and tested by the reduction process (p. 104). Any liquid for analysis should be strained through mushn, or filtered through paper, in order to separate all insoluble matters: these should be well l)ressed and drained. Should the hquid be coloured, this is of little moment, provided it is clear. If viscid, it should be diluted with water, and boiled with a small quantity of hydrochloric acid; on standing, a deposit may take place, and this should be separated by a filter. As a trial-test, we may now boil a slip of pure polished copper in a por- tion of the liquid, acidulated with pure hydrochloric acid, and examine any deposit on the metal by the method of Reinsch above described.


[121/872 b22652516_0121.jp2]

SEPARATION OF ARSENIC BY DISTILLATION. IO9 If the copper comes out unchanged, there is no considerable quantity of arsenic present. When arsenic is present in an organic liquid in large quantity, it may be precipitated as sulphide by a current of washed sulphuretted hydrogen. The liquid should be boiled, filtered, and acidulated with hydrochloric acid before passing the gas into it. When precipitation has ceased, the liquid should be again filtered, the precipitate collected, dried, and weighed. By operating on a measured portion of the solu- tion, the amount of white arsenic present may be determined by the weight of the sulphide obtained—five parts by weight of sulphide being very nearly equal to four parts of white arsenic. The properties of the yellow precipitate should be verified according to the directions given at p. 107. Distillation Process.—When the poison is in so small a quantity that it does not admit of precipitation by sulphuretted hydrogen, and no soKd particles of arsenic are found in the stomach, in its contents, or in any article of food, another method njay be resorted to for detecting Fig. 8. Apparatus for distilling organic and mineral substances containing arsenic. its presence. This method equally applies to the detection of arsenic deposited as a result of absorption in the soft organs of the body, as in the liver, kidney, or heart, and to arsenic in all its forms, except the pure insoluble sulphide or orpiment. The substance, whether food, blood, mucus, the liver, or other organ, should be first thoroughly dried, either in vacuo, in a current of dry air, or in a water-oven. The dried solid should then be broken into small portions and placed in a flask or retort of sufficient capacity, with enough of the strongest hydrochloric acid (free from arsenic) to drench it completely. After some hours' digestion in the cold, the retort or flask (a. Fig. 8) containing the mixture —which should be of such a size that the materials should not fill it to more than one-third or one-half of its capacity—should be fitted with a long condensing-tube (c) (or a Liebig's condenser may be used), and then gradually heated by a sand-bath until the acid hquid begins to pass over, A metallic head, formed of a cone of tin-plate or sheet-


[122/872 b22652516_0122.jp2]

no CONVERSION OF ARSENIC INTO CHLORIDE. copper, should be placed over the retort or flask so as to concentrate the heat and prevent condensation in the upper part of the vessel. A small flask receiver [d) with a loosely fitting cork may be employed to collect the product. This should contain a small quantity of distilled water, so as to fix and condense any acid vapours that may pass over. The receiver, as well as the condensing-tube, should be kept cool by wetting its surface with cold water difiused on a layer of blotting-paper placed over it. A perfect condensation of the distilled liquid is ensured by this arrangement. The distillation may be carried to dryness, or nearly so, on a sand-bath; and it is advisable, in order to ensure the separation of the whole of the arsenic as chloride, to add to the residue in the retort when cold, another portion of pure and concentrated hydrochloric acid, and again distil to dryness. By this process arsenic is at once separated from every metal excepting antimony, and these metals may be easily distinguished by tests applied to the distillate. If a little pianoforte wire be dissolved in dilute hydrochloric acid, and then added to the solution in the flask, no antimony will pass into the distillate. The liquid product may be coloured, turbid, and highly offensive if distilled from decomposed animal matter. Exposure to the air for a few hours sometimes removes the offensiveness, and there is a pre- cipitation of sulphur, or of some sulphide of arsenic. The distillate may be separated from any deposit by filtration, and, if still turbid, it may be re-distilled to separate it from any organic matter that may have come over. If there is a yellow deposit, it should be examined for sulphide of arsenic. If arsenic is present in the substance submitted to distillation, the distillate will contain arsenic in the form of soluble chloride : this does not volatilize from a diluted solution at common temperatures. The quantity of dry organic substance used in the experiment must depend on the quantity of arsenic present, as revealed by a preliminary trial with Reinsch's process. If large, one-third of an ounce of the dried substance, or even less, will yield sufficient chloride of arsenic for further proceedings. For the absorbed and deposited poison, half an ounce of the dried organ, corresponding to two ounces of the soft organ, will frequently suffice; but a negative conclusion of the absence of arsenic should not be drawn from a smaller quantity than from two to four ounces of the dried substance, whether liver, kidney, or heart. These tissues, it must be remembered, contain about 76 per cent, of water. If oily matter should be distilled over, this may be separated by passing the distillate through a paper filter wetted with water. The distilled liquid, containing chloride of arsenic, should be sub- mitted to a further analysis. For this purpose one-third of it should be diluted with three or four parts of water, and boiled in a clean flask. When boihng, a piece of bright copper-^foil (free from arsenic), about l-16th of an inch square, should be introduced. If there is chloride of arsenic in the liquid, even the l-4000th of a grain, its presence will be indicated by a change of colour, and by the deposit of a dark metallic film on the copper. If the quantity of arsenic


[123/872 b22652516_0123.jp2]

REDUCTION OF CHLORIDE. Ill present is believed to be very small, the surface of copper introduced should be proportionately small. Another portion of the distilled liquid added to the stannous chloride and boiled (see p. 106) will give a brown colour or a brown precipitate, according to the quantity of arsenic present. If this is large, a dark mirror-like layer of metallic arsenic is deposited on the inside of the tube. The remaining two-thirds of the distilled liquid, sufficiently diluted, should now be introduced into a Marsh's apparatus, or into an evolution-flask provided with a funnel- tube, the capacity of which must be regulated by the quantity of acid liquid to be examined. The kind of apparatus employed in this stage is represented in the engraving (Fig. 9, below): A the flask, with funnel- tube B, and connecting-piece c; the funnel-tube should be long enough to dip just below the surface of the acid liquid. The short connecting piece is bent at a right angle, and, like b, is carried through a closely fitting cork in the neck of the flask. This tube should be only long enough to go through the cork, and its open end should be bevelled off so that any vapour which is condensed on it may drop back as a hquid into the flask, d is the drying-tube containing fragments of spongy Apparatus for testing Chloride of Arsenic obtained by distillation. Fig. 10. Portion of tube separated with a deposit of Metallic Arseiic in the contracted portion. chloride of calcium, secured by cotton wool at both ends. At the flask end of this tube should be placed some well-dried bibulous paper, saturated with acetate of lead. This has the advantage of stopping any gaseous sulphur compound which may escape from the zinc or acid liquid, e e, a hard and not easily fusible glass tube, free from lead, contracted in two situations, k k", to about the diameter of the tenth of an inch or less, the tube itself having a diameter of from a quarter to three-eighths of an inch, r f are supports made of stout wire, to prevent the tube from falling when heated to redness, g is a test-glass to hold one or two fluid drachms


[124/872 b22652516_0124.jp2]

ARSENIC. REDUCTION OF THE CHLORIDE. 112 of a strong solution of nitrate of silver, h is a Bunsen burner; or a spirit-lamp may be used. The arrangement being thus made, the zinc and hydrochloric acid are first tested as to their freedom from arsenic. Portions of pure zinc are placed in the flask a, the parts of the apparatus are then connected, and pure hydrochloric acid, diluted with three or four parts of water, is poured into the flask by the funnel b, which operates as a safety- valve. Bubbles of air and gas speedily appear in the liquid in g, if the corks fit well and the whole of the arrangements are air-tight. Pure zinc is sometimes but imperfectly acted on by the acid. In this case some clean platinum wire or foil may be wound round the bars of the zinc, and the evolution of hydrogen will be thus accelerated. It is, however, better that the hydrogen should come off rather slowly. If the materials are pure, the solution of nitrate of silver should undergo no change of colour. The glass Q should be placed on a sheet of white paper, whereby the slightest tinge of brown or black is made perceptible. When all the air is expelled from the tube, the smokeless flame h may be applied to it at about one inch in front of a contraction of the tube, as indicated in the engraving, and the glass heated to redness. No metahic deposit should take place at k. If the materials are quite pure, the transparency of the glass tube at ^. will be unchanged. From a quarter to half an hour will be sufficient for this experiment. Now add to the acid liquid in the flask a a portion of the liquid obtained by distillation. The presence of arsenic in this will be immediately revealed by the silver solution in the glass G acquiring a brown or black colour, according to the quantity of arsenic present, and at the same time deposits of metalHc arsenic may be obtained by heating the glass tube E E. The silver solution is allowed to become saturated with the gas. Any escape of the gas from the glass, or by leakage from any of the junctions of the apparatus, is at once indicated by holding near to the spot, filtering-paper wetted with nitrate of silver. This is blackened if arsenic is escaping. The glass with the silver solution is removed, the end of the tube well washed, or another tube substituted for e e, and this is allowed to dip into about one drachm of fuming nitric acid in a test-glass similar to g, or in a small porcelain capsule. After a time, the acid loses its colour, and the arsenic of the gas is converted into arsenic acid, which may be obtained by evaporation. The further testing of the products is simple. J. The sflver solution contains arsenic in the state of dissolved ^rsenious acid, with some excess of nitrate of silver. By filtration it is obtained colourless and clear. A weak solution of ammonia is then added to it, and yellow arsenite of silver is precipitated (see p. 106). 2. The nitric acid liquid is evaporated to dryness in a small porcelain capsule. One or two drops of water are added to the residue, with a drop of weak ammonia if it should be very acid. A solution of nitrate of silver is then added to it; arsenate of silver, of its well-known brick-red colour, is imme- diately produced. 3. The portions of tube k k' with the metallic deposits in them may be separated by a file, and then hermetically


[125/872 b22652516_0125.jp2]

ARSENIC IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS AND SOLIDS. Fig. 11. sealed; or, if necessary, one or more of them may be tested by the methods described on pp. 107, 108. With these results the evidence of the presence of arsenic may be considered to be conclusive. The poison is obtained by this process, not only in its pure metallic state, but in the distinct two forms— arsenious and arsenic acids. It will be observed that the process here employed is an improved form, in which the burning of the gas is unnecessary. The editor prefers to precipitate the liquid in the receiver, after dilution with water, by means of a stream of sulphuretted hydrogen gas, and to collect, wash, and dry the precipitate. It is then mixed with a dry flux of carbonate of sodium and cyanide of potassium, and introduced into a hard narrow glass tube, through which a stream of dry carbonic acid gas is passing. On applying heat to the mixture of yellow sulphide of arsenic and flux, a fine sublimate of metallic arsenic is obtained, even with a minute trace of arsenic; and to this sublimate appropriate tests can be applied (see p. 107). Reinsch's process can be employed for detecting arsenic, deposited as a result of absorption, in the liver, kidneys, or other soft parts. About four ounces of the organ, or more if necessary, cut into small pieces, may be boiled in a flask in a mixture of one part of pure hydrochloric acid and four of water, until the structure of the organ is broken up. The flask may be of the shape represented in the an- nexed engraving (Fig. 11), and either a naked flame or a sand-bath may be employed. A small glass funnel should be placed in the neck of the flask. This re- ceives and condenses the vapours, which fall back into the flask. By this arrangement the boiling may be continued for a long time, without material loss by evaporation. The flask should not be more than half full, and heated gently until all froth is expelled. A fine platinum wire, having a small piece of pure copper- foil, should be immersed in the liquid when boiling. This enables the operator to remove the copper and examine it at intervals, after immersing it in distilled water. If it is much coated with metalhc deposit, larger portions of copper-foil may be successively introduced until the liquid is exhausted. The deposit on the copper may then be tested by the method described at p. 108. The deposit is permanent. Some copper gauze on which arsenic had been thus deposited was ex- amined after twenty-five years, and, although much changed in appearance by exposure, it yielded a perfect subhmate of octahedral crystals. It need hardly be observed that the quantity of arsenic found in the stomach or other organs can convey no accurate idea of the quantity actually taken by the deceased, since more or less of the poison may have been removed by violent vomiting and purging as well as by absorption and elimination. A large quantity found in the stomach Flask employed in the analysis of substances by Reinsch's pro-


[126/872 b22652516_0126.jp2]

114 ARSENITE OF POTASSIUM. or bowels indicates a large dose; but the finding of a small quantity- does not prove that the dose was small. The value of chemical evidence does not depend on the discovery of any particular quantity of poison in the stomach—it is merely necessary that the evidence of its presence in the body should be clear, distinct, conclusive, and satisfactory. At the same time, a reasonable objection may be taken to a dogmatic reliance upon the alleged discovery in a dead body of minute fractional portions of a grain; and, considering the great liability to fallacy from the accidental presence at that date of arsenic in the articles used for its detection, the chemical evidence in the French case of Madame Laffarge (1840), in which the whole quantity discovered in the dead body was stated to be the 1-130th part of a grain, was of a most unsatisfactory kind, and should have been re- jected. No man ought to base evidence on such a minute quantity of poison in a case of hfe and death. The condition of the arsenic found in a stomach should be specially noticed. A witness should be prepared to say whether it is in fine powder or in coarse fragments; whether it is mixed with soot or indigo, or whether it is in the ordinary state of white arsenic. These points may be material as evidence in reference to proof of possession, of purchase, or administration. Arsenic is not a normal constituent of the human body. Under no circumstances is it found in the tissues after death, except in cases in which it has been taken or administered during life. Absenite of Potassium. Liquok Arsenicalis. (Fowler's Solu- tion.)—Symptoms and Appearances.—There is a case recorded in which this medicinal solution destroyed life. A woman took half an ounce (= two grains of white arsenic) in divided doses, during a period of five days, and died from the effects. There was no vomiting or purging, but after death the stomach and intestines were found inflamed. (' Prov. Jour., 1848, p. 347.) A mixture of arsenic, soft-soap, and tar- water is largely used in agricultural districts for kilhng the fly in sheep. This has caused death, under the usual symptoms of arsenical poison- ing, in at least two instances. In 1874 the Coombs family, consisting of eight persons—the father, mother, and six children—were all poisoned by drinking water from a bucket which had contained an arsenical sheep-dipping composition. The mother and three of the children died. The symptoms produced were unusual—diarrhoea being a less prominent symptom than vomiting. The poison appeared to exercise a profound impression upon the nervous system, producing tetanic spasms and convulsions. An arsenical rash was a characteristic of the severest and fatal cases. In the bodies of the mother and one child the editor detected arsenic. The bodies of the other two children were not examined for poison. Analysis.—The solution has the odour of thicture of lavender, is of a reddish colour, and has an alkaline reaction. One fluid ounce of it contains 4^ grains of arsenious oxide. It gives a green precipitate (arsenite of copper) with sulphate of copper, and a yellow precipitate with nitrate of silver. Acidulated with hydrochloric acid, and treated


[127/872 b22652516_0127.jp2]

FLY-WATER. ARSENITE OF COPPER. with a current of sulphuretted hydrogen gas, it yields a yellow sulphide; and, when boiled with that acid and pure copper, a deposit is obtained which readily furnishes, by heat, octahedral crystals of arsenious oxide. Fly-Water is a name apphed to solutions of various arsenical compounds in water. Mixtures of this kind are formed by dissolving one part of the arsenite of sodium or potassium and two parts of sugar in twenty parts of water. Paper soaked in this solution, and dried, is used for killing flies under the name of Papier moure; and perhaps this is the safest form in which arsenic can be used for such a purpose. The editor has found the fly-papers of commerce to contain from 7J to 10 grains each of arsenious acid in a soluble form. In 1884 two women were convicted {Seg. v. JFlannagan and Higgins, Liverpool Winter Ass., 1884) of the murder of four persons by means of infusions of such papers. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1884, i. pp. 419, 469.) Arsenite of Copper. Scheele's Greek. Emerald Green.— This is a metallic arsenite, met with in commerce and the arts; and it constitutes, wholly or in part, a great variety of green pigments employed for paper-hangings, known as emerald green (aceto-arsenite of copper), mineral green, Brunswick, Schweinfurt, Vienna, or Paris green. It is also found in the form of oil-paint, forming cakes in boxes of water-colours, spread over confectionery, in wafers, on adhesive envelopes, in wrappers for chocolate, isinglass, etc., and lastly, and most abundantly, in various kinds of green decorative papers used for covering the walls of sitting and bed rooms. Although this compound is insoluble in water, it is sufficiently soluble in the acid mucous fluids of the stomach to be taken up by the absorbents, and carried as a poison into the blood. Roussin has traced the means by which this insoluble poison finds its way through the skin, and the circumstances under which it may be absorbed by the unbroken skin. In two cases which proved fatal in 1865, the workmen suffered chiefly from vomiting and colicky pains. The skin was tinged of a green colour, and arsenic was detected in the soft organs. He found that all poisons were liable to be absorbed by the unbroken skin, when, as a result of evaporation, a solid film was left on the surface. Alcohol and other solvents of fat, when used as solvents for the poisonous solid, would favour its absorption into the body. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1867, pp. 179, 182.) In a case which was the subject of a criminal trial, this substance was proved to have caused the death of a gentleman by reason of its having been employed to give a rich green colour to some blanc-mange served at a public dinner—the person who employed it considering that emerald or mineral green was nothing more than an extract of spinach, which is commonly employed for colouring confectionery and ices. It led to death under the usual symptoms, and the parties were convicted of manslaughter. {Beg. v. Franklin and Randall. Northampton Sum. Ass., 1848.) The symptoms of poisoning that have been observed in persons who have inhabited rooms of which the walls were covered with this arsenical


[128/872 b22652516_0128.jp2]

Il6 ARSENICAL WALL-PAPERS. ARSENIC ACID. compound, are as follows: dryness and irritation of the throat, bronchial cough, irritation of the mucous membrane of the eyes and nostrils, languor, headache, loss of appetite, nausea, colicky pains, numbness, cramp, irritability of the bowels attended with mucous dis- charges, great prostration of strength, a feverish condition, and wasting of the body. These symptoms may not all present themselves in any one case ; they are derived from the examination of numerous cases. No suspicion of the cause has in many instances been entertained until ordinary treatment had failed to impart relief, and an analysis of the paper had been made. The connection of the symptoms with this cause appears to have been in some instances clearly established by the fact that, after the removal of the paper, especially from bed- rooms, the symptoms have disappeared. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1876, ii. p. 653; also 1877, i. p. 8.) Yet comparatively few of those who are exposed suffer from symptoms of poisoning. Various deaths, chiefly among children, from the use of this paper are now recorded; and it is probable that to the noxious practice of covering the walls of our sitting and bedrooms with large quantities of arsenic in loose powder, many insidious cases of illness and chronic disease may be referred. Men and women employed in the manufacture of these poisonous pigments suffer severely. Girls employed in making artificial green leaves, in which this substance is used in fine powder, may suffer from inflamma- tion of the conjunctivae, with thickening and swelling of the eyelids. (' Lancet,' 1873, i. p. 174.) The precautions now adopted render such cases rare. Children's toys are often coloured with this poisonous compound. In one case a child, set. 5 years, was seized with sickness, diarrhoea, and great depression. The cause of these symptoms was traced to a box of counters coloured bright green. The child had imbibed the poison, either by handling or putting the counters into its mouth. Analysis.—For the chemical characters of Scheele's Gkeen, see p. 106. The wall-paper pigment called Emerald Green is a mixture of arsenite and acetate of copper. The green colour is very intense, even by candle-light. The presence of arsenic in this compound may be easily detected by the tests for sohd arsenic (p. 104); but the fol- lowing is a simple method which admits of speedy application : A slip of the suspected paper should be soaked in a moderately strong solution of ammonia. The green colour is removed, and a blue compound of copper is formed and dissolved in a few minutes. This result estab- lishes only the presence of a compound of copper soluble in ammonia. If the ammonia does not become blue, there is no compound of copper present y if it does become blue, a large crystal of nitrate of silver should be placed in a white saucer, and a small portion of the blue liquid poured over it. The presence of arsenic in the blue liquid is revealed by the production of yellow arsenite of silver over the surface of the crystal. Arsenic Acid. Alkaline Arsenates.—Arsenic acid is an artificial product almost entirely confined to the chemical laboratory and to the manufactory. Some authors state that it is a more powerful poison


[129/872 b22652516_0129.jp2]

SULPHIDES OF ARSENIC. CHLORIDE OF ARSENIC. II7 than arsenious acid; others, that it is less poisonous. No fatal case of poisoning by it in the human subject has been recorded. The arsenates of potassium and sodium must be regarded as active poisons, although there are but few instances on record in which life has been destroyed by them. Analysis.—Arsenic acid is a white non-crystalline deliquescent solid. 1. It is very soluble in water, forming a highly acid solution. 2. It is precipitated of a brick-red colour by ammonio-nitrate of silver. Sulphides of Arsenic.—Orpiment, or Yellow Arsenic, owes its poisonous properties to the presence of a variable proportion of arse- nious acid, sometimes amounting to as much as thirty per cent, of its weight. Orpiment is much employed in the arts, in painting, dyeing, paper-staining, the colouring of toys, and formerly for the colouring of sweetmeats ; but it is not often used as a poison. In the exhumation of the bodies of persons who have died from arsenic, it is common to find the yellow sulphide in the stomach. White may be converted into yellow arsenic in the dead body, but yellow cannot be changed into white arsenic during putrefaction. Orpiment produces symptoms and appearances similar to those caused by arsenious acid; but the dose required to destroy life varies according to the proportion of arsenious acid with which it happens to be mixed. This is not a common form of poisoning: the yellow colour of the poison would lead to suspicion; but by reason of this colour, orpiment may be given or taken by mistake for mustard or turmeric. The editor has met in his practice with one fatal case. The symptoms differed in no respect from those of a typical case of poisoning by white arsenic. Orpiment is largely used in tanning. Analysis.—The commercial sulphide yields a solution of arsenious. acid on boiling it in water acidulated with hydrochloric acid. It readily gives the well-known sublimates of metallic arsenic, either with soda- flux or cyanide of potassium (see pp. 104, 105). Chloride of Arsenic.—This is a solution of arsenic in diluted hydrochloric acid, used in pharmacy. It contains 4^ grains of arsenious acid in one fluid ounce. It is a highly poisonous preparation. In 1857 a woman took, in three doses, thirty minims over a period of twenty- four hours. The quantity of arsenic taken was not more than the tenth part of a grain^ and yet the symptoms which followed were of a severe kind, resembling those of chronic poisoning. These were constriction of the throat, pain and irritation of the stomach and bowels, tingling and numbness of the hands and feet, loss of muscular power, and a feeling of extreme depression. The medicine was withdrawn, and the patient slowly recovered. It seems that she had not taken arsenic previously, and there was no evidence of the existence of a peculiar susceptibility to the effects of arsenic. The quantity taken was very small to produce such alarming symptoms. The usual medicinal dose of this solution is from two to eight minims. Analysis.—This compound is the product obtained in the separation of arsenic from organic solids by distillation with hydrochloric acid (see p. 109). It may be tested by the processes of Marsh and Keinsch, as


[130/872 b22652516_0130.jp2]

Il8 ARSENETTED HYDROGEN. MERCURY. there described. When boiled with fuming stannous chloride, it is decomposed, and metallic arsenic of a brown-black colour is deposited. Arsenetted Hydrogen.—This is a gaseous poison of arsenic, pro- ducing when respired, even in small quantity, very serious effects upon the system. It has caused death in several instances among chemists who have incautiously breathed the deadly vapour while performing scientific experiments. Trost has reported three other fatal cases with a full account of the symptoms and appearances. These cases occurred accidentally among workmen engaged in separating silver from lead by means of zinc and hydrochloric acid. The latter was found to contain much arsenic which escaped with the hydrogen. ('Vierteljahrsschr. f. Gerichtl. Med.,' 1873, 1, p. 269.- See ' On Poisons.' ' Chem. News,' 1863, ii. p. 307.) CHAPTER 12. POISONING BY MERCURY.—CORROSIVE SUBLIMATE.—SYMPTOMS. — CHRONIC POISONING.—APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH.—CHEMICAL ANALYSIS.—PRO- CESS FOR MERCURY IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS.—CALOMEL.—WHITE AND RED PRECIPITATES.—OTHER COMPOUNDS OF MERCURY. Metallic Mercury is not commonly regarded as a poison; It is usually stated that a large quantity of it may be swallowed without affecting health, or without causing more uneasiness than that which may arise from its great weight. It rapidly passes through the bowels. A case which occurred to Gibb shows that this is not strictly true. For the purpose of causing abortion, a girl swallowed four and a half ounces by weight of mercury. It had no effect on the womb, but in a few days the girl suffered from a trembling and shaking of the body (mercurial tremors) and loss of muscular power. These symptoms continued for months, but there was no salivation and no blue mark on the gums. (' Lancet,' 1873, i. p. 339.) If mercury is breathed or swallowed in a state of vapour, or if applied to the skin or mucous membrane in a state of extreme mechanical division, in which state it appears to be easily susceptible of oxidation, it is liable to be absorbed, and to produce a poisonous action on the body. The effects are prin- cipally manifested by salivation, trembling and involuntary motions of the limbs, loss of appetite, and emaciation. These symptoms are occa- sionally seen in workmen engaged in trades in which they are exposed to the inhalation of mercurial vapours. Corrosive Sublimate.—This substance has received a variety of chemical names. It has been at various times called Oxymuriatey Chloride^ Bichloride^ Mercuric Chloride, and Perchloride of Mercury. To prevent any confusion from scientific chemical nomenclature, the old and popular name of Corrosive Sublimate, expressing the principal properties of the substance, is here retained. It is commonly seen under the form of heavy crystalline masses, or of a white crystalline


[131/872 b22652516_0131.jp2]

119 CORROSIVE SUBLIMATE. SYMPTOMS. powder. Its taste is powerfully austere and metallic, so that no poisonous quantity of it could be easily swallowed without the person becoming immediately aware of it. Its solutions, even when very highly diluted—1 in 20,000—have an intensely metallic (coppery) taste. It is very soluble in water, hot or cold, and speedily sinks in it, in which properties it differs strikingly from arsenic. At the ordinary tempera- ture it dissolves in about fifteen parts of water; but the poison is more freely soluble in alcoholic liquids. It is largely used as an antiseptic. Symptoms.—The symptoms produced by corrosive sublimate generally come on immediately, or within a few minutes after the poison has been swallowed. In the first place, a strong metallic taste in the mouth, often described as a coppery taste, is perceived; and there is, during the act of swallowing, a sense of constriction almost amounting to suffocation, with burning heat in the throat, extending downwards to the stomach. In a few minutes violent pain is f6lt in the abdomen, increased by pressure, especially in the region of the stomach. There is nausea, with frequent vomiting of long stringy masses of white mucus, mixed with blood, attended with severe pain in the abdomen, and profuse purging. The countenance is sometimes swollen and flushed ; in other cases it has been pale and anxious. The pulse is small, frequent, and irregular, and is scarcely perceptible when the symptoms become aggra- vated. The tongue is white and shrivelled, the skin cold and clammy, the breathing difl&cult; and death is commonly preceded by fainting, convulsions, or general insensibility. The internal parts of the mouth, when examined, are swollen, and sometimes present a white appear- ance, as if the cavity had been recently washed with a solution of nitrate of silver; the lips are often swollen. Suppression of urine has been frequently noticed among the symptoms: it existed in a well-marked case of poisoning by this substance, where the patient lived four days, but did not pass any urine during the whole of this time. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1844, p. 24;) This symptom was observed in a case re- ported by Wegeler (Casper's ' Wochenschrift,' 1846, p. 30), in which a youth, set. 17, swallowed three drachms of the poison, and died on the sixth day. During the last three days no urine was secreted. The case was otherwise remarkable from the fact that no pain was experienced on pressure of the abdomen, and that the pulse underwent no change until shortly before death. Iti another case, in which twenty grains of corrosive sublimate in solution were swallowed, suppression of urine and salivation came on the third, and the patient died on the ninth day. (' Lancet,' 1845, ii: pp. 650, 698.) The external application of corrosive sublimate to tumours or ulcers may destroy lif6 with all the usual symptoms of acute mercurial poisoning. A quack was convicted of manslaughter (Winchester Lent Ass., 1859, Reg. v. Crook) by applying corrosive sublimate in powder to a cancerous tumour in the face of the deceased. The man died under the usual symptoms. After death the bowels were found extensively inflamed and ulcerated. Corrosive sublimate was detected in the diseased parts. At the Exeter Lent Assizes, 1878, a quack-doctor was indicted for the manslaughter of a woman under similar circum-


[132/872 b22652516_0132.jp2]

ACUTE AND CHRONIC MERCURIAL POISONING. I20 stances. The deceased had ulcers in her legs, and a solution of corrosive sublimate, largely diluted, was applied by the prisoner in order to cure them. The death of the woman was assigned to the absorption of the poison ; but the judge held that gross and culpable ignorance had not been proved, and under his direction the prisoner was acquitted. A girl, set. 9, died from the effects of this poison, locally applied to the scalp for the treatment of ringworm. The liquid applied was alcohol containing eighty grains of corrosive sublimate to the ounce. She suffered from mercurial poisoning in a severe form, and died on the fifth day after the application. ('Pharm. Jour.,' Sept. 9, 1871, p. 216; ' Lancet,' 1871, ii. p. 413 ; and ' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1871, p. 353.) No theory of idiosyncrasy is required to account for death under such circumstances. In the first edition of the author's work ' On Poisons ' (1848), p. 394, fatal cases are related of poisoning by corrosive sublimate through the unbroken skin. Two brothers thus lost their lives, the one dying on the fifth and the other on the eleventh day. Those who deny the power of the unbroken skin to absorb corrosive sublimate and cause all the usual effects of acute mercurial poisoning, should make them- selves and not their patients the subjects of experiment. Severe salivation sometimes follows the external application of a mercurial compound. In 1884 a man was tried at the Surrey Sessions for putting coiTOsive sublimate into a kettleful of water. He was acquitted. Several persons suffered from partaking of the poisoned liquid. Corrosive sublimate differs from arsenic : 1, in having a well-marked taste ; 2, in producing violent symptoms in a few minutes ; and, 3, in the fact that the evacuations are more frequently mixed with blood. The symptoms produced by corrosive sublimate, m the first instance, resemble those of cholera; but if the person should survive several days, they are more like those of dysentery,—violent straining, and shreddy mucous discharges mixed with blood, being frequently observed. Slow or Chronic Poisoning.—The symptoms are much modified when the poison is taken in small doses at intervals for some days or weeks. There are colicky pains with nausea, vomiting, general uneasiness, and depression. The salivary glands become inflamed and painful; the tongue and gums are red and swollen, sometimes ulcerated, and there is foetor of the breath. A deep blue line, hke that observed in poisoning by lead, is sometimes found around the edges of the gums. The patient experiences difficulty of swallowing and breathing. The constitutional effects are indicated by irritability or looseness of the bowels, difficulty of breathing, spitting of blood, cough, general trembhng or convulsive movements of the limbs, and palsy, with fever and emacia- tion, under which the patient sinks. One of the most marked effects of slow or chronic poisoning by mercurial preparations is salivation, or ptyahsm, indicated by an increased flow of saliva. This is by no means a necessary symptom in cases of acute poisoning by corrosive sublimate, but it not unfrequently shows itself about the second or third day. In many instances the patient dies too rapidly for this effect to follow ; but


[133/872 b22652516_0133.jp2]

APPEARANCES. FATAL DOSE. 121 even when he survives some days, salivation is not always observed. In placing rehance upon this symptom, it must be remembered that salivation may arise from a variety of causes irrespective of the use of mercury. (See 'On Poisons,' 3rd edit. p. 366.) Substances sold under the name of Worm Lozenges have been known to cause death by producing fatal salivation. In the salivation caused by mercurial compounds, the saliva always contains mercury, which may be detected by Reinsch's process. The elimination of this metal takes place by all the fluid secretions, but chiefly by the urine and intestinal liquids. ('Lancet,' 1873, i. p. 476.) Workmen exposed to the vapours of metallic mercury exhibit a peculiar form of paralysis, known as mercurial tremors or "trembles." Appearances after Death.—Tfiese, as in the case of arsenic, are chiefly confined to the stomach and bowels. Corrosive sublimate, how- ever, affects the mouth, throat, and gullet; the mucous membrane is softened, of a white or blueish-grey colour, and inflamed; that lining the gullet is similarly affected, and partly corroded and softened. The mucous membrane of the stomach is more or less inflamed, sometimes in patches; and there are masses of black extravasated blood found beneath it. Occasionally this has a slate-grey colour, and the mucous coat beneath may be found reddened. A case occurred in Guy's Hospital, in which the mucous membrane was simply inflamed, much resembling the condition presented in cases of arsenical poisoning. The coats of the stomach are sometimes corroded, and so much softened that they cannot be removed from the body without laceration. Similar appearances have been met with in the small and large intestines, especially in the caecum. In a case reported by Herapath, in which twenty grains were taken and death occurred on the ninth day, the mucous membrane of the stomach was softened, but there were no well- marked appearances of the irritant action of the poison on this organ. The caecum had been the seat of the most violent inflammation, the whole surface being of a deep black-red colour, and there were patches of sloughing in the coats. ('Lancet,' 1845, ii. p. 700; ' Edin. Month. Jour.,' Dec. 1851, p. 532.) Perforation of the stomach is rare as an effect of this poison: there is one case on record. Appearances like those just described have been seen in the intestines, not only where the case has terminated fatally in a few hours, but where it has been protracted for six, eight, and even eleven days. The smallest dose that is reported to have destroyed life is three grains. This was in the case of a child, and the quantity was accurately deter- mined from the fact of its having been made up by mistake for three grains of calomel, which a physician had intended to order. It is pro- bable that, under favourable circumstances, from three to five grains, or even less, would destroy an adult. In an acute case a person commonly dies in from one to five days, but death may take place much sooner or later than this. In the shortest fatal case on record the man died in less than half an hour; but the quantity of poison taken was not ascertained. (' On Poisons :' CoEROsivE Sublimate.)


[134/872 b22652516_0134.jp2]

CORROSIVE SUBLIMATE. ANALYSIS. 122 Chemical Analysis.—Corrosive sublimate is usually seen in heavy crystalline masses, or in the form of a white powder. In the solid state—1. When the powder is heated on platinum-foil, it melts, and is volatilized as a white vapour without leaving any residue. 2. When heated in a close tube, unlike arsenic, it melts before subliming, and forms a sublimate, consisting of stellate prismatic crystals (see Fig. 12). 3. The powder is changed in colour by the following reagents : iodide of potassium produces a bright scarlet, potash a yellow, and sulphide of ammonium a black compound ; ammonia does not alter its colour. 4. The mercury and chlorine may be discovered by one process. Mix the powder with four parts of dried carbonate of sodium free from chlorides (obtained by incinerating the bicarbonate), until the residue in the reduction-tube fuses and becomes white. A subHmate of metallic Fig. 12. Fig. 13. Stellate Crystals obtained by heating Prismatic Crystals of Corrosive Sublimate (^orrosive Sublimate, magnified 30 from a solution in water, magnified 30 diameters. diameters. mercury in distinct and well-defined globules will be obtained (see Fig. 14). Detach by a file the end of the tube containing the fused residue, which is chloride of sodium with some undecomposed carbonate. Digest it in water with nitric acid, and'apply heat until it is entirely dissolved ; then add to the solution nitratfe of' silver. A white precipitate of chloride of silver, insoluble in boiling nitric acid, will be at once pro- duced. The solid is thus proved to contain both mercury and chlorine, and the only compound of these elements which is soluble in water is corrosive sublimate. In solution in water. A few drops of the solution of corrosive subli- mate evaporated on a glass slide yield slender opaque silky prisms (see Fig. 13). When a weak solution of' iodide of potassium is dropped on them, they acquire a bright scarlet colour. This scarlet coloration, which may be obtained from the minutest crystal and only one drop of solution, proves that the body dissolved in water is corrosive sublimate : it is thus distinguished from every other mineral poison, and all other substances whatever. 1. Stannous chloride added to a solution of corrosive sublimate produces a grey precipitate, which, after it has been


[135/872 b22652516_0135.jp2]

DETECTION IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS. 123 boiled, is resolved into globules of metallic mercury. 2. Sulphuretted hydrogen and sulphide of ammonium produce, after a time, a black sulphide, not soluble in alkalies or diluted acids. 3. If after the liquid has been acidulated with hydrochloric acid, bright copper-foil, wire, or gauze, is plunged into it, the copper will acquire a silvery white deposit, even in Fig-14- the cold, but more rapidly by heat. When the copper with the metallic deposit is dried and heated in a tube, globules of' mercury are sublimed (see Fig. 14). In organic liquids.—The liquids should be separated by filtration from any insoluble portions. The ktter should be pressed, dried, and set aside for a separate analysis. The liquid portion should be slightly acidulated with hydrochloric acid, warmed, and a slip of copper-foil introduced; ■ if this is not immediately coated with Globules of Mercury, mercury, it may be allowed to remain for some hours. When a deposit has taken place, the copper should be removed, washed in water and' afterwards in ether, and dried. If the quantity of corrosive subhmate dissolved in an organic liquid is moderately large, it may be removed by means of ether. Place the filtered liquid supposed to contain the dissolved poison in a stoppered tube; add to it twice its volume of ether, and agitate the liquid at intervals for a few minutes. Allow the liquid to subside, pour off the ether into a large watch-glass, and submit the liquid to spontaneous evaporation. A's the ether evaporates, the corrosive sublimate will be deposited in white silky-looking- prisms. These ma)"- be purified, if necessary, by solution in water or alcohol, and the solution again crystallized. Corrosive sublimate may thus be separated from arsenic and other mineral poisons in solution. If mercury and arsenic are associated in a poisonous mixture, or in the tissues, the arsenic may be entirely removed by distillation with hydrochloric acid (p. 109). Masses of corrosive subhmate may be sometimes locked iipin thick viscid mucus; and, in such cases, the coarse powder being heavy, it may be separated by simply agitating the viscid liquid' in water, and then decanting the upper portion suddenly. This poison is decomposed and precipitated by many organic substances, such as albumen, fibrin, mucous mem- brane ; also by gluten, tannin, and other vegetable substances. Thus, then, we cannot always expect' to find it in the stomach in a state of solution. Other methods of analysis are chiefly directed to the separa- tion of the mercury only. The suspected liquid is boiled, filtered, and acidulated with hydrochloric acid. 1. To one portion add stannous chloride in excess, again boil the liquid and filter to separate the mercury, the whole of which is precipitated either as a black powder or in grey globules. On boiling this deposit in strong hydrochloric


[136/872 b22652516_0136.jp2]

124 DETECTION OF MERCURY IN THE TISSUES. acid, the small globules coalesce to form liquid mercury. 2. Into another portion of the hquid, introduce copper foil, and gently- warm. The copper becomes covered with a layer of silvery-white metal, either immediately or in a few hours. A large quantity of copper may be thus quoted. The coated copper should be digested in warm alcohol or ether, dried, and heated in a reduction-tube, when a sublimate of silvery-white globules will be obtained, well marked by their opacity, lustre, and spherical shape when examined with the' microscope (see Fig. 14, p. 123). The subhmate of metallic mercury differs from that of arsenic in the fact that, when heated, it sublimes simply as metal without change. It is not oxidized (like metallic arsenic) by heating it in a reduction-tube, but is simply transferred with its metalhc lustre and globular form from one part of the tube to another. In the event of a doubt existing respecting the nature of the subhmate, the following experiment will solve it. Cut off by a file the portion of glass on which the globules are deposited ; introduce this into a wide short tube, with a few drops of nitric acid. Heat the acid liquid, and evaporate it to dryness on a sand-bath. White crystals will remain, if the sublimate was mercury, and too great a heat has not been applied. On touching the white residue cautiously with a drop of a weak solution of iodide of potassium, the crystals will acquire a scarlet colour. In place of copper, a weighed slip of gold-foil may be wound round a rod of zinc, and introduced into the acidulated liquid. The gold is soon covered with a silvery-white layer of mercury. In doubt- ful cases the deposition may be allowed to go on for twenty-four or even forty-eight hours. The gold-foil must then be detached from the zinc, rinsed successively with water, alcohol, and ether, dried, and introduced into a reduction-tube. On gently heating the portion of the tube containing the gold-foil, a sublimate of metallic globules of mercury is obtained, and the foil resumes its original yellow colour, and weight. The sublimate must be further examined and tested, as above described. In the tissues.—Insoluble substances suspected to contain mercury, as well as the soft organs, e.g. liver and kidney, may be cut up and boiled in one part of hydrochloric acid and four parts of water until dissolved. The mercury may then be separated by copper or by gold with zinc. This method will show the presence of mercury, but not of corrosive, subhmate, in the body. Whether the mercurial compound has acted as a poison or not must be determined from symptoms and appear- ances ; whether it has been given or taken as a medicine or not, is a conclusion which must also be determined from other circumstances. The proof that the mercury was really in the form of corrosive subli- mate could only be derived from the discovery of some undissolved portions of the solid poison in the stomach or its contents, or from a separation of the poison itself by means of ether. If thus obtained after filtration of an organic liquid, it would show its presence in the form of a soluble salt; and it may be remarked that all the soluble salts are poisonous, and are rarely used internally as medicines. If undissolved, the absorbed mercury may have been derived from some


[137/872 b22652516_0137.jp2]

CALOMEL. WHITE PRECIPITATE. mercurial medicine innocently taken by the deceased. Nothing is more common than to discover traces of mercury in the stomach, bowels, liver, kidneys, or other organs of a dead body. No impor- tance can be attached to this discovery in the absence of evidence that the deceased has actually suffered from symptoms of mercurial poisoning. As to the mercury found in the tissues, it may have been derived from a soluble or insoluble compound, or from exposure to the vapours of the metal or of its salts, in various trades. Calomel. Mercurous Chloride,—This substance, although com- monly regarded as a mild medicine in small doses, may destroy life, by causing excessive salivation with ulceration and gangrene; and in large doses it acts as an irritant poison. A man suffering from eczema of the scrotum was directed to employ black wash, consisting of one drachm of calomel in eight ounces of lime water. In a few days he had foetor of the breath, swelling and tenderness of the gums, with sahvation. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1878, i. p. 367.) Analysis.—It is known from corrosive sublimate by its insolubility in water, alcohol, and ether. It is known from white precipitate by its insolubihty in acids, and by its being blackened by alkalies. A mercurial sublimate may be obtained from it by heating it with dry sodium carbonate. Under certain conditions, this compound may be changed into corrosive sublimate in the stomach. (' Pharm. Jour.,' Aug. 31, 1878, p. 164.) White Pkecipitate. Ammoniated Mercury.—The symptoms which this compound produces are violent vomiting, cramps, great thirst, purging, pain in the stomach and bowels, and convulsions. Tenderness of the gums and salivation have been observed. After death the results of inflammation of the stomach and bowels are seen. Experiments on dogs and rabbits have shown that this is a formidable poison. The greater number of recoveries have been probably owing to the substance being early ejected by vomiting. Rabbits (which do not vomit) were killed by doses of four and five grains in a few hours. After death, mercury was found deposited in various organs, but more in the kidneys than in the other viscera. (For additional facts connected with the action of this poison, see ' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1860, p. 483.) A trial for attempting to poison by this substance took place in 1869. {Beg. v. Seaham, Maidstone Sum. Ass., 1869.) The compound is white, but, as the result of boihng, it gave a yellow colour to the gruel in which it was administered. In Beg. v. Har- greaves (Manchester Lent Ass., 1866), a girl was convicted of an attempt to poison her father by this substance. The poison was put into milk and medicine. It produced a burning sensation in the throat and stomach, and thus led to suspicion. About ten grains of white precipi- tate were detected in some buttermilk. In Feb. 1873, a boy, set. 12, was convicted, at the Central Criminal Court, of administering this poison feloniously in medicine. The prosecutor experienced a hot sensation, unlike the bitter taste he had before perceived. A white powder was found in the medicine which proved to be white precipitate. Analysis.—White precipitate is a chalky-looking compound con-


[138/872 b22652516_0138.jp2]

POISONING WITH RED PRECIPITATE. 126 taining about eighty per cent, of mercury. It is insoluble in water and alcohol. As sold, it frequently contains, as an impurity, corrosive sublimate to the amount of one or two per cent., separable by ether or alcohol. It is soluble in acids, not blackened by alkalies, and yields a mercurial sublimate when heated with carbonate of sodium. Stannous chloride produces with it a black deposit of mercury. If boiled in a solution of potash, it evolves ammonia, and yellow oxide of mercury is formed. It may be detected in organic liquids and solids by boiling them in one part of hydrochloric acid and four parts of water. The mercury may then be separated by means of copper (see p. 124). It is not used internally, but it is much employed by the poorer classes in the treatment of ringworm. Ked Precipitate. Mercuric Oxide. Bed Oxide of Mercury.—This substance is poisonous, but instances of poisoning by it are rare. One case occurred at Guy's Hospital in 1833. The patient recovered in four days. In another case a woman, set. 20, swallowed a quantity of beer containing red precipitate. Four hours after she was in a state of stupor, with a weak, irregular, scarcely perceptible pulse, dilated pupils, cold and clammy skin, and copious discharge from the mouth. She had vomited once shortly before, and red particles were seen in the ejected fluid. There was pain in the abdomen. Under treatment the symptoms abated, but there was pain in the region of the stomach, a desire to vomit, much salivation, and slight diarrhoea. She gradually recovered. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1878, ii. p. 101.) A case of recovery after the administration of 120 grains has been recorded. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1884, i. p. 56.) Analysis.—By its great density and insolubility in water, it may be separated from all liquids. Its red colour is characteristic. When heated in a close tube, it is resolved into oxygen and mercury, the latter being deposited in globules. Other compounds of mercury, such as the nitrates, the sulphates, the cyanide, and the sulpho-cyanide have given rise to accidents, and in a few instances have destroyed life, but they very rarely require the notice of a medical practitioner. In Feb. 1891, two men died from the external application of nitrate of mercury as a remedy for an eruption of the skin. The sulphide (vermilion), on account of its insolubility, is probably quite inert. When heated in a dry state with anhydrous carbonate of sodium, all the compounds of mercury yield sublimates of the metal in globules. All the liquid and solid compounds give a dark precipitate of mercury when boiled with stannous chloride.


[139/872 b22652516_0139.jp2]

SUGAR OF LEAD. SYMPTOMS. APPEARANCES. 127 CHAPTER 13. POISONING "WITH LEAD.—SUGAR OF LEAD.—SYMPTOMS.—APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH.—CHEMICAL ANALYSIS.—LEAD IN ORGANIC MIXTURES.—RED LEAD.—CARBONATE OR WHITE LEAD.—CHRONIC POISONING.—POISONING "WITH COPPER.—BLUE VITRIOL.—SYMPTOMS.—APPEARANCES.—CHEMICAL analysis.—copper in organic liquids. Sugar of Lead. Acetate of Lead.—Symptoms.—Acetate or sugar of lead is by no means an active poison. In medical practice it has often been given in con- siderable doses without any serious effects resulting. When from one to two ounces have been taken, the following symptoms have been observed: a burning, pricking sensation in the throat, with dryness and thirst, vomiting, and uneasiness at the pit of the stomach, followed by severe colic. The abdomen is tense, and the skin covering it is sometimes drawn in. The pain is intermittent, and relieved by pressure. There is generally constipation of the bowels. If any faeces are passed, they are commonly of a dark colour, indicative of the conversion of a portion of the lead into sulphide. The skin is cold, and there is great prostration of strength. The pulse is slow. When the case is protracted, the patient has been observed to suffer from cramp in the calves of the legs, pain in the inside of the thighs, numb- ness, and sometimes paralysis of the limbs. The affection of the nervous system is otherwise indicated by giddiness, torpor, and even coma. A well-marked blue line hag been noticed round the margin of the gums, where they join the teeth. (For a remarkable series of cases of poisoning by acetate of lead, see 'Lancet,' 1849, i. p. 478.) In 1882 a woman was convicted [Reg. v. Louisa Jane Taylor, C. C. C, Dec. 1882) of the murder of Mrs. Tregelles, an aged female, by the repeated administration of acetate of lead. The administration extended over several weeks; and the editor found the body largely impregnated with lead—more especially the stomach. The symptoms were colic, vomiting, blackening of the teeth, paralysis, and at the last epileptiform convulsions. Appearances.—In one fatal case of acute poisoning the mucous membrane of the stomach was destroyed in several places, especially near the intestinal opening; and the greater part of the intestines were in a state of acute inflammation. In animals, according to Mitscher- lich, when the dose is large, the mucous coat of the stomach is attacked and corroded; this change appears to be purely chemical, and takes place in those parts of the body with which the salt of lead comes in contact. If given in a small dose, it is decomposed by the gastric secretions, and exerts no corrosive action on the mucous membrane. When acetate of lead was given in a state of albuminate dissolved in acetic acid, death took place with great rapidity; but on inspection, the stomach was not found corroded. This corrosive action belongs to the neutral salt, and is not manifested when the dose is small


[140/872 b22652516_0140.jp2]

128 SUGAR OF LEAD. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. or when the poison is combined with an acid. Nothing is actually known concerning the fatal dose of this substance ; but it may be taken in comparatively large quantity without producing serious effects. Thirty or forty grains have been given daily in divided doses without injury. Chemical Analysiff. Acetate of Lead as a solid.—1. If a portion of the powder is heated in a small reduction-tube, it melts, then becomes solid ; again melts, acquiring a dark colour, and gives off vapours of acetone and acetic acid, easily recognized by their odour and reaction on litmus-paper. A black mass is left in the tube, consisting of carbon and reduced metallic lead. No sublimate is formed. If heated on mica, yellow oxide of lead with reduced metal remains. 2. It is very soluble even in cold water; spring water containing carbonic acid and sulphates is turned milky by it. 3. A small portion of the powder dropped into a solution of iodide of potassium acquires a bright yellow colour. 4. When dropped into solution of potash it remains white. 5. In sulphuretted hydrogen water or sulphide of ammonium, it is turned black, in which respect it resembles the white salts of some other metals. 6. When the powder is boiled in a tube with diluted sulphuric acid, acetic acid, known by its odour and volatility, escapes. All these properties taken together, prove that the salt is acetate of lead. Acetate of Lead in solution.—1. A small quantitj^, slowly evaporated on a glass shde, will give slender white prismatic crystals (see Fig. 15), which are turned yellow by iodide of potassium, and black by sulphide of ammonium. 2. Diluted sulphuric acid produces an abundant white precipitate, insoluble in nitric acid, but soluble in hydrochloric acid, and in a large excess of potash. 3. It is precipitated of a yellow colour by iodide of potassium. The yellow iodide of lead is soluble in potash, forming a colourless solution. It is also dissolved by concentrated hydrochloric acid, and by hot water. 4. Sulphide of ammonium, or sul- phuretted hydrogen gas, produces a black precipitate, even when less than a 100,000th part of the salt is dis- solved. 5. Place a few drops of the solution on clean platinum-foil, acidu- late with acetic acid, then apply through the solution, to the surface of the platinum, a thin slip of polished zinc—dark-blueish crystals of metallic lead are instantly deposited on the zinc ; by this method a small quantity of the metal may be detected and separated. Lead in organic liquids.—Acetate of lead is precipitated by many organic substances, especially by albumen and tannin. Thus we may have to analyze either an organic liquid containing lead, or a solid Crystals of Acetate of Lead, magnified 80 diameters.


[141/872 b22652516_0141.jp2]

DETECTION OF LEAD IN THE TISSUES. 129 precipitate consisting of mucus or mucous membrane, or albumen com- bined with lead. The liquid should be filtered and examined by a trial test, i.e. either by adding to a portion, sulphuric acid, when sulphate of lead is precipitated, or by exposing filter paper, dipped into the suspected liquid, to a current of sulphuretted hydrogen gas. If the paper is not stained brown, there is not much lead dissolved; if it is stained brown, we dilute the liquid to destroy its viscidity, should this be necessary, and pass into it a current of washed sulphuretted hydrogen gas until a precipitate ceases to form. The black sulphide of lead should be collected on a filter, washed, and dried ; then boiled for a quarter of an hour in a mixture of one part of nitric acid diluted with four parts of water. This has the effect of transforming it, at least in part, into soluble nitrate of lead. This liquid, when filtered, may be evaporated to dryness, the crystalHne residue dissolved in water, and the tests for lead then applied to the solution. If the quantity is too small for the application of all the tests, we may first add sulphuric acid; should a white precipitate be formed, soluble in potash (free from lead), and this alkaline solution be again turned black by sulphide of ammonium, this is sufficient evidence of the presence of lead. Should there be no lead dissolved, we must decompose the solid and insoluble matters by boiling them with dilute nitric acid, filter, and test the filtered liquid, previously neutralized; or we may evaporate at once to dryness, destroy the organic matter by heat, and redissolve the residue in nitric acid for testing. In the tissues.—The organic matter, such as a part of the Hver or any other organ, should be dried^ and afterwards incinerated in a porcelain vessel. The ash should be heated with a small quantity of dilute nitric acid, and evaporated to dryness. The dry residue should be digested in a small quantity of distilled water (free from lead), filtered, and, after it has been slightly acidulated with nitric acid, a current of washed sulphuretted hydrogen gas should be passed into it. The production of a brown colour, or a brown precipitate, in a slightly acid liquid indicates the presence of lead. The precipitate may be dissolved in nitric acid, and further examined (see p. 128). Lead may thus be detected in the dry residue of urine. AH liquid and solid organic substances containing lead yield the metal or its oxide by incineration in a porcelain capsule. Goulard's Extract is a solution of subacetate of lead, containing thirty-five per cent, of the salt; and Goulard Water is a mixture of two drachms of this solution in a pint of water. The effects of these compounds, when swallowed or applied locally, are similar to those produced by the acetate, but are more severe. Red Lead.—This is a mixture or compound of the protoxide and peroxide of lead, much used in the arts. It has occasionally acted as a fatal poison. Dey relates the case of a woman who died from its effects in four or five hours, after convulsions. (' Lend. Med. Rec.,' 1882, p. 117.) White Lead. Suh-carhonate of Lead.—This is an insoluble, chalky-looking compound, which, like other salts of lead, may give rise K


[142/872 b22652516_0142.jp2]

CHRONIC LEAD-POISONING. I30 to the usual symptoms of lead-poisoning. In one instance it appears to have proved fatal. White lead has been used as a cosmetic to give a fair complexion. It is liable to absorption, and to cause the usual symp- toms of poisoning. The cosmetic Hquid of Madame Eachel consisted of a lead compound with fuUer's-earth, starch, and hydrochloric acid. Such a compound applied to the skin clearly would set up irritation in the skin, and be most injurious to health. Most of the cases of poisoning by this substance have been of a chronic character, carbonate of lead being one of the products of the action of water upon lead. Buchner has also reported the history of a family poisoned by lead, accidentally introduced as white lead into flour in a mill. (Friedreich's ' Blatt. f. Gerichtl. Med.,' 1884, p. 161.) Chronic Poisoning.-—Colica Pidonum^ or Painter's Colic, may be considered as the usual chronic form of poisoning by carbonate of lead. The disease is not, however, confined to an affection of the intestinal canal (colic), though this is the most common symptom. There is a peculiar form of paralysis—lead-paralysis, or ' wrist-drop;' pains in the joints, often termed ' rheumatic;' and a peculiar form of cerebral affection, of a fatal character, the prominent symptoms of which are epileptoid convulsions, simulating ordinary epilepsy, and ending in coma. The symptoms of lead-colic are usually well marked. There is at first pain, with a sense of sinking commonly in or about the region of the navel (the seat of the colon). Next to pain there is obstinate constipation, retraction of the skin of the abdomen, loss of appetite, thirst, a foetid odour of the breath, and general emaciation; with para- lysis of a peculiar kind affecting the extensor muscles, and causing a dropping of the wrist, or showing itself in a general paralysis of the limbs. The skin acquires a sallow colour, generally well marked in the face ; and the patient experiences a sweetish, styptic, or astringent taste in the mouth. A symptom of a peculiar nature was first pointed out by Burton (' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 25, p. 687), namely, a blue line on the edges of the gums, where these join the bodies of the teeth; the teeth are of a brownish colour. The blue line on the gums may be regarded as a distinguishing sign of lead-poisoning. It is owing to the deposi- tion of lead in these structures—a fact proved by the action of chromic acid on the excised gums. When touched with it they acquire a yellow colour (chromate of lead), and when afterwards treated with an alkaline sulphide, they become black from the formation of sulphide of lead. (' Lancet,' 1878, i. p. 913.) Lead-palsy usually comes on after several attacks of colic. It shows itself first, and most prominently, in the extensor muscles of the fore- arm—the muscles supphed by the muscuio-spiral nerve; hence the supinator longus muscle escapes. The disease, however, is not always confined to the forearm. The dropped hand, and the inability to raise it, gives rise to the term ' dropped wrist.' Epileptiform convulsions ending in coma are a late affection, in severe cases, as e.g. among workers in white-lead factories, and are commonly a fatal affection. The editor has met with several such cases. Hair-washes generally contain a salt of lead in solution. The use of them may lead to all the symptoms of chronic lead-poisoning.


[143/872 b22652516_0143.jp2]

CHRONIC LEAD-POISOXING. Chronic poisoning with lead often kills the patient, since a great amount of mischief is usually done before the cause is discovered. The appearances found after death have been a contraction of the cavity of the large and small intestines, a considerable thickening of their coats, and degeneration of the kidneys. The contractions have been especially noticed in the colon—the seat of colic. The various circumstances under which this form of poisoning is liable to occur are elsewhere fully described. (See ' On Poisons,' p. 409.) One of the most frequent causes of chronic lead-poisoning is the use of water kept in leaden cisterns or pipes ; or the careless employment of white or red lead as a cement for pipes and cisterns. For an mstructive series of cases showing the effects of water thus poisoned, the reader is referred to a paper by De Mussy. (' Dublin Quar. Jour,,' May 1849; also ' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 44, p. 260.) These cases occurred at Claremont, among the members of the ex-royal family of France. The effects were traced to the use of water which had acquired an impregnation of lead by contact with that metal, in the proportion of one grain to the gallon. Thirteen out of thirty-eight persons were affected, and to such a degree that the nails of the toes and fingers in some acquired a blueish discoloration. The children of the family did not suffer. No symptoms appeared until after the water had been in use for a period of from five to seven months, and more than half of those who used the water escaped any ill effects. The presence of lead in public water-supplies has recently attracted great attention, in con- sequence of the pollution of the supplies of Sheffield, Keighley, Hudders- field, and Bacup. It appears that soft waters, especially if acid, are very prone to act injuriously upon leaden pipes. (' Lond. Med. Rec.,' 1882, p. 430 ; ' Chem. News,' 1882, ii. p. 88 ; ' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1889, i. p. 992 et seq.) Cases of poisoning are sometimes observed as the result of the accidental introduction of lead into the system in wine, beer, cider, milk, lemonade, and other liquids. Earthenware glazed with htharge imparts lead to fat in dripping, also to acid liquids. Snuff" is some- times adulterated with red lead to improve its colour, and some cases of lead-poisoning have occurred from the use of such snuff". A spurious tinfoil, consisting chiefly of lead faced with tin, is much used as a covering or wrapper for articles of food. When exposed to damp, this metallic alloj'' undergoes chemical changes whereby sub- carbonate of lead is produced. Children's farinaceous food has thus become impregnated with lead. In tinned iron vessels there is often a large quantity of lead alloyed with the tin, as it is a much cheaper metal. Hamilton has noticed that lead-poisoning has been produced in India by the use of the tinned cooking-pots. (' Lancet,' 1877, i. p. 253.) There is another unsuspected method by which lead may find its way into that common article of food—flour. It is sometimes a custom of millers to repair the holes in their millstones with melted lead. The lead is thus ground into and mixed with the flour. Alford states that fifteen or twenty persons, in diff"erent families, suff'ered from 4


[144/872 b22652516_0144.jp2]

POISONING WITH -COPPER. 132 colic, and other symptoms of chronic lead-poisoning, from this cause. The blue line on the gums was well marked. It was found that they had all had their own corn ground at the same mill. On examining the millstones, they were found to be honey-combed with lead. There was on the surface of the stones about ten pounds of lead. ('Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1877, i. p. 627.) The workers in white lead, especially those engaged in the operation of stoving and grinding the compound, are most prone to suffer in a severe form from lead-poisoning. This has been made a matter of recent legislation, in order to protect the workpeople from the insidious effects of lead compounds. Copper. All the salts of copper are poisonous. The two most commonly known in commerce are the Sulphate, or Blue Vitkiol, and the SUBACETATE, Or VeRDIGRIS. Blue Vitriol. Sulphate of Copper.—Symptoms.—The medicinal dose of sulphate of copper as an emetic is from five to fifteen grains, and, as a tonic, from one to three or four grains. It has been frequently given for the purpose of procuring abortion. In doses of half an ounce and upwards it acts as an irritant on adults, and a much smaller quan- tity would suffice to destroy infants or children. The salt speedily causes vomiting of the most violent kind; this sometimes expels the poison from the stomach, and the person recovers. There is headache, with colicky pains in the abdomen, and purging; and in aggravated cases there are spasms of the extremities and convulsions. Perceval met with an instance in which violent convulsions were produced in a young woman by sixty grains of sulphate of copper. Paralysis, insensibility, and even tetanus, have preceded death, when the poison was administered to animals. Among the symptoms occasionally met with in the human being may be mentioned jaundice. This has been observed to attend poisoning with the sulphate, as well as by Scheele's green. Two children, one eight and the other six years old, ate a quantity of wheat which had been washed in a solution of sulphate of copper. They were seized with incessant vomiting, the vomited matter being of a blueish or greenish colour. The vomiting continued more or less for several days. There was no purging. The elder child recovered, but the younger was very much prostrated, and died about two months afterwards. ('Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1877, ii. p. 292.) In 1884 a girl was convicted of poisoning her mistress by introducing sulphate of copper into a jug of beer. The taste of the substance was perceived; the only results were severe vomiting. {Reg.Y. Mary Baker, C. C. C, Oct. 1884.) In 1886, a man was convicted of attempting to murder his wife by administering to her sulphate of copper in spruce and peppermint water. He was sentenced to twenty years' penal servitude. U'>eg. v. Beynolds, C. C. C, Sept. 1886.) The vomited matters are remarkable for being generally of a hlue or green colour; broken crystals of blue vitriol were discovered in them in a case in which the poison was taken in the state of coarse powder. If the


[145/872 b22652516_0145.jp2]

APPEARANCES. ANALYSIS. green colour of the vomited liquid is owing to altered bile, it will not acquire a blue tint on adding to a portion of it a solution of ammonia; but if caused by a salt of copper, this change of colour will serve to indicate the fact. Vekdigris, or subacetate of copper, in large doses, produces similar symptoms. Chronic poisoning by copper is occasionally seen among workers in this metal and its salts. The poison enters the system partly by the lungs in the form of dust, and partly by the skin in handling the metal or its salts. The marked symptoms are a coppery taste in the mouth, giddiness, pain in the bowels, vomiting, occasional diarrhoea, and wasting of the body. Clapton has pointed out another symptom, namely, a green line on the margin of the gums. He met with this in a sailor and in some working coppersmiths. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1868, i. p. 658.) The author saw two of these cases in 1868. The green line was well marked. The men brought with them a hammer used in their work. It had a greenish colour, and this was proved by tests to be owing to the presence of copper. The perspiration from the hands in working had converted the copper into a basic chloride, and had thus led to its absorption by the skin. Several cases of chronic poisoning by copper among coppersmiths have been treated by Cameron, but this symptom was not noticed. ('Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1870, 1, p. 581.) Gallippe Sur le Cuivre'') denies the injurious action of copper compounds upon the human body. Cases have, however, been observed of the injurious efi'ects of preserved vegetables, the green colour of which is often preserved by the use of sulphate of copper; and the cases of poisoning by sulphate of copper already referred to, are conclusive against Gallippe's views. Appearances.—In the few fatal cases which have been hitherto ex- amined, the mucous membrane of the stomach and intestines has been found more or less thickened and inflamed; and in some cases eroded and softened. The gullet has presented an inflammatory appearance. In one case of poisoning by verdigris the stomach was inflamed and thickened, especially towards the intestinal opening, the orifice of which, from the general thickening, was almost obhterated. The small intes- tines were throughout inflamed, and perforation had taken place, so that part of the green liquid was effused into the abdomen. The large intestines were distended in some parts, and contracted in others, and the rectum was ulcerated on its inner surface. (Orfila, ' Toxicologic.') The lining membrane of the intestines has been found throughout of a deep-green colour, owing to small particles of the copper salt (verdigris) adhering to it. Chemical Analysis.—The salts of copper, whether in the solid state or in solution, are generally known hy their blue or green colour. Tests.—1. Solution of Ammonia gives, in a solution of a salt of copper, a blueish-white precipitate, which is soluble in an excess of the test, forming a deep violet-blue liquid. 2. Ferrocyanide of potassium gives, in a very diluted solution, a rich claret-red precipitate. If the quantity of copper is small, the liquid acquires merely a light-red


[146/872 b22652516_0146.jp2]

134 DETECTION OF COPPER IN THE TISSUES. colour; if large, the precipitate is of a deep red-brown colour, and ot a gelatinous consistency. Ferrocyanide of potassium will act on the violet-blue solution produced by ammonia, provided a few drops of acetic acid are added in order to neutralize the ammonia. One portion of the liquid may thus be tried with the two tests. 3. Sulphuretted hydrogen gas and sulphide of ammonium give a deep chocolate-brown precipitate, even in an acid solution; or, if the copper is in small pro- portion, msrely a hght-brown colour. 4. A slip of polished iron (a common needle) suspended by a thread in the liquid slightly acidulated with sulphuric acid, is speedily, coated with a red layer of copper, even when the salt is in very small proportion. The iron thus coated may be washed, immersed in ammonia, and exposed to air. The hquid becomes slowly blue, and may then be tested with ferrocyanide of potassium as above. A minute quantity of copper may be thus easily detected. 5. The electrolytic test. If a few drops of the copper- solution are placed on platinum-foil, slightly acidulated with a diluted acid, and the platinum is then touched through the solution with a rod of zinc, metallic copper, of its well-known red colour, is immediately deposited on the platinum. When the quantity of copper is very small, there is merely a brown stain; but a blue hquid is formed by pouring on it ammonia, and exposing it to air. A coil of fine platinum and zinc wires may be substituted for the foil. Copper in organic liquids.—Copper is liable to be precipitated by certain organic matters, e.g. albumen, fibrin, and mucous membrane ; but some of these organic compounds are easily dissolved by acids, or even by an excess of the solution of copper salt. A portion at least of the salt of copper is, therefore, commonly held dissolved. In such cases the liquid is usually of a greenish colour, and has a strong coppery or metallic taste, even when the copper salt is in far less than a poisonous proportion. Having filtered the organic liquid, let a portion of it be placed in a clean platinum capsule. A few drops of diluted sulphuric acid should be added, and a rod of zinc introduced. Wherever the platinum is touched by the zinc, metallic copper is deposited; and, after having in this way coated the platinum capsule, the surplus liquid may be poured off and the capsule well washed out. The deposited copper, which is of a deep-red colour, is then dissolved in nitric acid, and the tests are applied after the excess of acid has been driven off" by heat, and the residue dissolved in water. In place of nitric acid and heat, a solution of ammonia may be poured on the metallic deposit in the cold. Under exposure to air the metal is oxidized and dissolved in a few minutes, formmg a blue solution. This ammoniacal solution may be neutralized with acetic acid, and ferrocyanide of potassium then added. The red colour of the deposit on platinum is character- istic of copper, and the mode of testing here advised renders the results conclusive. In the tissues.—Dry and incinerate the organic matter over a Bunsen burner provided with an iron tube. If the ordinary burner with brass tube be used, some copper will be volatilized from the burner and deposited on the ashes. Digest the residuary ash in pure hydrochloric


[147/872 b22652516_0147.jp2]

TARTAR EMETIC. SYMPTOMS. acid by heat, and then evaporate nearly to dryness. This residue may be dissolved in a small quantity of water, and a polished needle im- mersed in it for some hours. The metallic deposit, if any, on the needle may be recognized as copper, either by its colour or by the action of ammonia. Traces of copper have been found in many kinds of food, as well as in the tissues of the body, irrespective of the introduction of a copper salt as a poison. Thus copper has been detected in various green pickles, in preserved peas and other vegetables. It has been used in these cases as an artificial colouring. In prosecutions under the Sale of Food and Drugs Act, the question has arisen whether such a quan- tity of copper as 0*28 grain in a pound would render the article injurious as food. Copper is a noxious substance, and there is a penalty on the wilful admixture of any noxious substance with any article intended for food, whatever the proportion may be. In some cases, a grain and a half of sulphate of copper has been found in a pound of peas. The restrictions on the re-greening of preserved vegetables in France have been recently removed. CHAPTER 14. tartar emetic. antimonial wine. — symptoms. appearances. — chronic poisoning. — chemical analysis. — chloride or butter of antimony.—poisoning with salts of zinc and iron.—poisoning with chromates. Tartae Emetic. Tartar Emetic, or Tartarated Antimony, is met with in commerce as a heavj^ish white powder, freely soluble in twenty parts of water and less soluble in alcoholic liquids. It is used in medicine, and more largely in veterinary medicine. Antimonial Wine, i.e. the official solution of tartarated antimony in sherry wine (two grains in one fluid ounce), may easily be mistaken for ordinary sherry. The editor had a laboratory attendant who was made seriously ill by drinking this medicine, which he had pilfered. Tartar emetic is a constituent of many proprietary and patent cough medi- cines ; and these, when taken in excess, may produce a powerful depres- sant action upon the system. Symptoms and Effects.—When tartar emetic is taken in a poisonous dose, a strong metallic taste is perceived in the mouth during the act of swallowing. There is great heat, with constriction of the throat and difficulty of swallowing, violent burning pain in the region of the stomach, followed by incessant vomiting, profuse purging, faintness, and extreme depression. The pulse is small and rapid, and sometimes imperceptible ; the skin cold, and covered with a clammy perspiration; the respiration painful. Should the case prove fatal, death may


[148/872 b22652516_0148.jp2]

POISONING WITH TARTAR EMETIC. 136 be preceded by giddiness, insensibility, great prostration of strength, and sometimes violent spasms of the muscles of the Hmbs, which may assume either a clonic or a tetanic character. Such are the symptoms in an acute case of poisoning by this substance. The quantify actually required to destroy life is small. One drachm taken at a dose proved fatal in ten hours, in spite of early and frequent vomiting, (' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 45, p. 801.) In a case in which a girl took a teaspoonful of tartar emetic by mistake, recovery took place in three weeks. She suffered from enteritis, and, as an after-effect, her hair fell off. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1876, ii. p. 492.) A man took eighty grains. There was only slight vomiting an hour after he had taken it; but this became subsequently Very violent, attended with severe cramps in the legs, and profuse perspiration. He recovered in two days. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1877, i. p. 674.) In 1881 a young man was killed in six hours b}'- a dose of fifteen grains of tartar emetic. The characteristic pustular eruption of tartar emetic, often observed on the skin after its local application, was found on the mucous membrane of the stomach. (Friedreich's ' Blatt. f. Gerichtl. Med.,' 1882, p. 8.) On April 18, 1876, Mr. Bravo, set. 30, a barrister, was poisoned by tartar emetic. After dining with his wife, and whilst alone in his room at 6.30 p.m., he was suddenly seized with violent sickness and vomiting. When seen at 10.30 p.m., by Moore, he was lying back in a chair, totally unconscious; the breathing was noisy, and the heart's action was barely perceptible. He did not appear to suffer pain, and his appearance was not unlike that of a person under the effects of a narcotic. He had previously complained of pain in the stomach, and an emetic of mustard and water had been given. The pupils were widely dilated; and he was unable to swallow when seen shortly afterwards by Harrison. At 1.45 a.m. on the 19th, he first vomited blood. At 3.30 a.m., soon after he was seen by Geo. Johnson and Royes Bell, a little consciousness returned; and he then said, to account for his state, that he had rubbed his gums with laudanum, and that he might have taken some of this liquid. Just before becoming conscious, viz, at 2.45 a.m., he vomited blood, and passed bloody stools. Throughout the 19th, after the return of consciousness, he suffered excruciating pain, and was violently purged, and vomited frequently. On the 20th the patient was seen by Gull, at 6.30 p.m., who found him pulseless and dying. He was told that he was dying of poison, and was asked how he came by it. He replied, * I took it myself.' ' What did you take ?' ' Laudanum.' When told that he had taken more than laudanum, he made no further statement bearing upon the matter, except to repeat a second time, *I took it myself.' Pain, collapse, vomiting, purging, and occasional convulsions, especially of the upper limbs, continued till near the close, when the vomiting and purging ceased. He died on the 21st of April, fifty-five hours after the com- mencement of symptoms. At the autopsj'-, made next day, the follow- ing appearances were observed by Payne : There was no appearance of inflammation, congestion, or ulceration of the stomach, which contained about eight ounces of thick gruel-like matter of a yellowish colour.


[149/872 b22652516_0149.jp2]

APPEARANCES. containing small solid lumps, and had the odour of alcoholic fermenta- tion. The gullet was natural, and contained some of the same matter as the stomach. The first portion of the bowels was very soft, being torn in tying it; but subsequent careful examination showed no per- foration or ulceration. The surface was pale and yellowish hke that of the stomach. The whole of the small intestine was like this, except the lower part, where there were some red spots. This part of the bowels contained yellow pasty matter without any admixture of blood. Subsequent examination showed several small ulcers in the caecum, from which the bleeding had evidently taken place, but there was no perforation. The remainder of the large intestine was very deeply blood-stained, but without ulceration. The contents were a soft dark-red material, composed of fsecal matter mixed with blood. The liver and spleen were natural, as were also the pancreas, kidneys, and other abdominal organs. The skull, and the membranes of the brain, were quite natural, containing only the usual amount of blood. The brain-substance was also healthy, and contained no excessive amount either of blood or of watery fluid. The mouth and hps were natural, except that the papillae at the back of the tongue were somewhat more prominent than usual. There was no other appear- ance of disease in the body, except what has been noted. From the first vomit of the deceased. Redwood obtained antimony equivalent to ten grains of tartar emetic. Antimony was also detected in the liver, and in fluid taken from the large intestines of the deceased, but not in the contents of the stomach. Traces of the metal were also discovered in the urine passed during life. Redwood was of opinion that at least twenty grains of tartar emetic had been taken by deceased. A verdict of wilful murder by some unknown person was returned, no tartar emetic being traced into the hands of the deceased or any person about him. It was also known that Bravo was well read in medical jurisprudence, and was acquainted with the poisonous nature of tartar emetic. Some months after the return of the above verdict, evidence came into the possession of the editor— who watched the medical aspect of the case at the inquest on behalf of one of the persons living in the same house as the deceased—showing that Bravo had tartar emetic in his possession within six or sev^en weeks of his decease. He had purchased a large number of quack powders, extensively advertised as a cure for dipsomania, and received instructions that these, if administered too freely to his wife, would cause vomiting. It is possible that these powders—each of them consisting of half a grain of tartar emetic with a pink vegetable pigment —may have been taken in fatal amount by the deceased, who was unaware of their poisonous nature, for the purpose of causing ejection of the laudanum which he had admittedly taken. It is probable that the laudanum would delay the ejection of the tartar emetic, and thus increase the Hability to a fatal result. Appearances.—The following cases, as well as those already given, show the nature of the appearances likely to be found after death. Two children, a boy aged five, and a girl aged three years, each swallowed


[150/872 b22652516_0150.jp2]

TARTAR EMETIC. CHRONIC POISONING. a powder containing ten grains of tartar emetic mixed with a little sugar. It was stated that, in twenty minutes after taking the powders, they were seized with violent vomiting and purging, and great prostra- tion of strength, followed by convulsions and tetanic spasms ; there was also great thirst. The boy died eight hours, and the girl twelve or thirteen hours, after swallowing the poison. The bodies were inspected between four and live days after death. In that of the boy there was effusion of serum in the right pleura; the lower lobe of the right lung posteriorly was redder than natural, and the peritoneum was injected from recent inflammation. The mucous membrane of the duodenum was inflamed, and covered with a whitish-yellow viscid secretion ; this was observed throughout the intestines, but the colour was of a deeper yellow in the large intestines; there was no ulceration. The peri- toneal coat of the stomach was inflamed. The mucous membrane of this organ was also much inflamed, especially about the larger curvature and at the cardiac orifice ; there was no ulceration, but in one case there was a patch of lymph. The stomach contained about two ounces and a half of a dark bloody fluid, having a slightly acid reaction. The tests used did not indicate the presence of antimony. With regard to other appearances, the tongue was covered with a white fur, and appeared soddened; the throat was not inflamed; the windpipe and gullet had a natural appearance. On opening the head, the dura mater was found congested ; the longitudinal sinus contained a coagu- lum of lymph, and but little blood. The vessels of the surface of the brain were much injected with dark-coloured blood, the whole surface having a deep purple colour. Every portion of the brain, when cut, presented many bloody points. The cerebellum and medulla oblongata were also congested; there was no effusion in the ventricles or at the base of the brain. In the body of the girl the morbid appearances were similar; and there were, in addition, on the arms, legs, and neck, patches resembling the eruption of scarlatina. The arachnoid mem- brane was more opaque than usual; and on the mucous membrane of the stomach, where the inflammation was greatest, were two or three white spots, each about the size of a split pea, which appeared to be the commencement of ulceration. (' Lancet,' 1846, ii. p. 460. See also case of Bravo, p. 136.) In cases of chronic poisoning by this substance, the principal symp- toms are as follows: Intense nausea •; vomiting of mucous and bilious liquids ; great depression and prostration of strength; watery purging, followed often by constipation of the bowels ; small, contracted, and frequent pulse; loss of voice and muscular strength; coldness of the skin, with clammy perspiration; and death from complete exhaustion. In these cases antimony may be detected in the urine by Reinsch's process. There are several cases reported which show that tartar emetic has been thus criminally employed. (See ' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1876, i. p. 639.) It has been supposed that the cases in which this poison has proved fatal have been few; but the author has elsewhere reported thirty-


[151/872 b22652516_0151.jp2]

CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. seven, of which sixteen were fatal. The smallest fatal dose was, in a child, three-quarters of a grain (' Jour, de Chimie,' 1847, p. 472), and in an adult, two grains ; but in this latter instance there were cir- cumstances which favoured the fatal operation of the poison. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1857, p. 415; Andral's ' Clinique Med.,' 1836, p. 698.) Chemical Analysis. Tartar Emetic as a solid.—In a state of powder it is white and crystalline.—1. It is easily dissolved by water; the solution has a faintly acid reaction, and an acrid metalHc taste. 2. The powder, dropped into sulphide of ammonium, is turned of a deep reddish-brown colour, and is thereby known from other white metallic salts. 3. When heated in a reduction-tube, it is charred, but does not previously melt like acetate of lead. The metal is partially reduced by the carbon of the vegetable acid, and the decomposed mass has a greyish-blue metallic lustre. No metallic sublimate is produced in this experiment by the moderate heat of a spirit-lamp. 4. When boiled in water containing one-sixth of pure hydrochloric acid, and metallic copper is immersed in the liquid, a deposit of antimony takes place on this metal. The colour of the deposit is violet-red if the quantity is very small, but the deposit is grey, or black and pulverulent, if very large. 5. The solution acidulated with one-tenth part of hydrochloric acid gives in the cold a black deposit on a surface of pure tinfoil. This serves to distinguish antimony from arsenic, which, under these circumstances, produces no deposit on pure tin. On the other hand, tartar emetic and other antimonial compounds give no deposit when boiled with stannous chloride and fuming hydrochloric acid, unless arsenic is present as an impurity, Tartar Emetic in solution.—1. On slowly evaporating a small quan- tity of the solution on a slip of glass, the salt will crystallize in tetrahedra, and in derivatives of the octahedron (Fig. 16). If obtained i^'ig-16- from a very diluted solution, this ■mmmp^^^^^PBMMM| crystallization is confused, and re- H^^^^^^^^^^^^^^^B orange coloured precipitate, differing Crystals of Tartar Emetic, magnified sulphide. This precipitate is soluble in sulphide of ammonium, and is dissolved by strong boiling hydro- chloric acid. In liquids containing organic matter.—Tartar emetic is precipitated sembles that of arsenic. 2. Hydro- chloric, nitric, or sulphuric acid, each gives a white precipitate, soluble in excess of the acid. This triple re- action is very characteristic of tar- tarated antimony. 3. Ferrocyanide of potassium does not precipitate the solution, whereby tartar emetic is known from most other metaUic poisons. 4. tiulphuretted hydrogen gas produces in the solution a red dish- in colour from every other metallic 30 diameters.


[152/872 b22652516_0152.jp2]

140 DETECTION OF TARTAR EMETIC IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS. by tannin in all its forms, but not readily by albumen or mucous membrane; therefore it may be found sometimes dissolved in the liquids of the stomach, and sometimes precipitated. These insoluble compounds of antimony are soluble in tartaric acid; and thus, if there should be no antimony dissolved, it may easily be brought into a state of solution by means of this acid. The liquid, acidulated with tartaric acid, should be boiled and filtered. If it should be highl}^ coloured or turbid, it may be concentrated and submitted to the process of dialysis. The antimonial compound may thus be obtained in a clear solution. A current of sulphuretted gas may now be passed into the whole or a portion of it until there is no further precipitation. The sulphide is collected, washed, and dried. If it is the sulphide of antimony, it will have an orange-red or brown colour, it will be insoluble in a solution of ammonia, and when dried will be dissolved by a small quantity of boiling hydrochloric acid (forming chloride of antimony), with the evo- lution of sulphuretted hydrogen gas. The boiling should be continued for several minutes until the liquid is colourless. On adding this solu- tion, if not too acid, to water, a white precipitate of oxychloride of antimony falls down. The white precipitate is soluble in tartaric acid. This is characteristic of antimony. If the sulphuretted hydrogen is passed into a coloured organic liquid, the orange-red colour of the sulphide can be only well seen in the froth. The following method of detecting the metal when dissolved in any organic liquid, is based upon the principle by which copper and other metals may be detected under similar circumstances. Acidulate a portion of the suspected liquid with hydrochloric acid, and place it in a shallow platinum capsule. Touch the platinum, through the acid liquid, with a rod of pure zinc. Hydrogen is evolved, and, wherever the metals come in contact, metallic antimony, in the state of a black powder, is deposited upon the surface of the platinum. The liquid should be poured off, and the capsule thoroughly washed with distilled water. This may be effected without disturbing the black deposit. This deposit should be heated with strong nitric acid—evaporated to dryness—the white residue dissolved in strong hydrochloric acid, and this solution, not too much diluted, precipitated' by a current of sulphuretted hydrogen. A reddish-coloured precipitate indicates anti- mony. If a portion of this hydrochloric acid solution is added to water, it may give a precipitate of white oxychloride of antimony, soluble in tartaric acid, and this solution may be precipitated of an orange-red colour by sulphuretted hydrogen. By this process antimony in small quantity may be detected in, and separated from, any liquid containing organic matter. If there is no deposit under these circumstances, a rod of zinc or a piece of tinfoil, with a layer of thin platinum-foil wound round it, should be suspended in the sufficiently diluted acid liquid for some hours. If antimony is present, it will be deposited on both metals in the form of a black powder. In the tissues.—The antimony may be deposited in the organs in so small a quantity that neither the sulphuretted hydrogen nor the deposition on platinum process will yield any satisfactory results. The


[153/872 b22652516_0153.jp2]

141 BUTTER OF ANTIMONY. liver or other organ should be cut into small pieces, and boiled in a mixture of one part of hydrochloric acid and five parts of water. After some time, the liquid may be tested by introducing into it a slip of polished copper-foil free from antimony. If antimony is present in small quantity, the copper will acquire a reddish or violet-coloured deposit on its surface; if in large quantity, the deposit will be grey with a metallic lustre, or sometimes in the state of a loose black powder. These deposits, when heated in a reduction-tube, do not yield octahedral crystals like those obtained from arsenic. A slip of pure tinfoil may be suspended in the cold acid liquid, so diluted that the hydrochloric acid forms only one-tenth part by measure. Either im- mediately, or in the course of a few hours, if antimony is present, the tin is covered with a black deposit of the metal. Antimony in the metalhc state is so easily procured from a small quantity of material, by one or other of the above-mentioned processes, that on no account should this be omitted. The procuring of the metal may be made subsidiary to the procuring of the sulphide, as the metal can be easily dissolved by boiling the deposit on copper with a solution of permanga- nate of potassium. It can then be converted into sulphide, and obtained entirely free from organic matter. A reliance on a small quantity of a coloured precipitate from sulphuretted hydrogen alone, without the production of the metal in some form, would be most un- satisfactory as chemical evidence. No chemist would rely upon the production of a yellow sulphide as certain evidence of the presence of arsenic, unless he obtained the metal arsenic from that compound. The separation of antimony from the tissues does not necessarily indicate that it has been criminally administered or has caused death ; but its presence there should be reasonably accounted for, as antimony may have been unlawfully administered. In several cases of suspected death from poison, deposits on copper, evidently of an antimonial nature, have been obtained from the liver or tissues. On inquiry it has been found that antimonial medicines had been taken shortly before death. It is best, however, in all cases to shred up the tissue, and boil it with dilute hydrochloric acid, a few crystals of potassium chlorate being introduced from time to time, till a clearish j^ellow solution is- obtained. The solution is then warmed with bisulphite of sodium till it persistently smells of sulphur dioxide. The whole is then allowed to stand in a warm place till the sulphur dioxide has disappeared. The liquid is filtered, and the filtrate precipitated with a stream of washed sulphuretted hydrogen gas. A precipitate of sulphide of antimony falls, mixed with sulphur. This may be dissolved in boiling strong hydro- chloric acid, and tested as above for antimony. Terchloride, or Butter of Antimony.—This is a strongly corrosive poison. It is used for browning gun-barrels, and in veterinary medi- cine. It has caused death in several instances. Two women, mother and daughter, were tried {Reg. v. Wallis and WalUs, Worcester Sum. Ass., 1883) for the murder of the illegitimate infant child of the younger prisoner by means of terchloride of antimony, but were ac- quitted from insufficient evidence of administration. It was at first sup-


[154/872 b22652516_0154.jp2]

142 ZINC. posed that the child had died from poisoning by ferric chloride, which was detected in the stomach by a medical man. The editor found antimony in the viscera, and also in the matters vomited and passed from the bowels of the child. The ferric chloride was merely the impurity always met with in commercial terchloride of antimony. The symptoms and appearances resemble those produced by concentrated hydrochloric acid. The terchloride gives a white precipitate when added to water. This is soluble in tartaric acid, and the solution is precipitated of an orange-red colour by sulphuretted hydrogen. It has caused death in several instances. Zinc. Sulphate of Zinc, White Vitriol.—Symptoms and Appearances.— The symptoms produced by an overdose of sulphate of zinc are a styptic taste, pain in the abdomen and violent vomiting, coming on almost immediately, followed by purging. After death the stomach has been found inflamed. The sulphate appears to act as a pure irritant, and has no corrosive properties. This salt may cause death indirectly as the result of exhaustion from violent vomiting, when an ordinary dose has been given to a person already debilitated by disease. It does not appear to be a very energetic poison. In one case a lady recovered after taking sixty-seven grains. (' Lancet,' 1856, i. p. 540.) In another, which occurred in 1872, a man, set. 20, recovered in a few days after taking an ounce of sulphate of zinc by mistake for Epsom salts. There was early vomiting and purging of a most violent kind, with great prostration of strength. The greater part of this large dose was no doubt thus quickly carried out of the body. Chloride of Zinc.—Symptoms and Appearances.—This, which is commonly sold under the name of' Sir W. Burnett's fluid,' is a corro- sive and irritant poison, and is much used as a deodorizer. The patient experiences a sense of heat and burning in the mouth and throat, in the act of swallowing the liquid, which has been frequently fatally mistaken for fluid magnesia. There is a burning and griping pain in the stomach, and nausea, followed usually by violent retching and vomiting -—the vomited matters being streaked with blood and mixed with much flaky mucus and shreds of mucous membrane. This has produced an appearance of frothiness about the mouth. Violent purging has been observed among the symptoms. A stage of collapse supervenes, and the skin becomes cold and livid. A man, set. 62, took two fluid ounces of soldering fluid, made by dis- solving zinc in hydrochloric acid—and hence a solution of chloride of zinc. An emetic was given without effect, and he speedily became collapsed. There was profuse purging. A little scanty urine was drawn off by a catheter. He retained his intellect till death, four hours and a half after taking the poison. Crosse found after death the tongue white and shrivelled; and the mucous membrane of the mouth as if charred. The gullet was contracted with the mucous membrane, white, silky, and easily detached. The stomach was contracted and rugose, the mucous membrane being of an ashy-grey colour, with black patches.


[155/872 b22652516_0155.jp2]

PREPARATIONS OF IRON. The stomach contained chloride of zinc and free hydrochloric acid. The whole of the bowels were hardened and contracted, the mucous membrane thickened and grey in colour—the duodenum and upper part of the jejunum especially so. ('Brit. Med. Journ.,' 1883, ii. p. 820.) After death from this poison, the lining membrane of the mouth and throat has been found white and opaque—that of the stomach has some- times been hard and leathery, at others corrugated, opaque, and of a dark leaden colour. The lungs and kidneys are congested. The chloride is both a corrosive and irritant poison, exerting also a peculiar action on the nervous system. If a person survives the acute stage, he may die in the chronic stage from stricture of the gullet or pylorus, or from emaciation and exhaustion as a result of the local action of the poison on this organ. Analysis.—In these two compounds, the zinc is detected by their aqueous solutions giving white precipitates with a current of sulphur- etted hydrogen gas, while the sulphuric acid or the chlorine may be recognized by their respective tests. Metallic zinc may be obtained by plunging into a weak solution of the salt, a slip of magnesium. Peepakations of Ikon. Ferrous Sulphate. Sulphate of Ironi Copperas. Green Vitriol.— This compound has been administered with malicious intention. One death from it took place in 1837 or 1838. It cannot, however, be an active preparation; for a girl who swallowed an ounce of it recovered, although she suffered for some hours from violent pain, vomiting, and purging. (Christison.) Green vitriol, or copperas, is sometimes given as an abortive. A woman of the name of Riley was indicted (Notting- ham Aut. Ass., 1859) for administering copperas to two children. She put the substance into grueL It gave to the gruel a greenish colour and a peculiar taste, which led to the discovery. It caused sickness, but no other serious symptoms. As there was no evidence of an intent to murder, and as it was then not unlawful to administer poison with any other intent, the prisoner was acquitted. This salt has been much used for criminal purposes in France. (See 'Med. Gaz.,' vol. 47, p. 307; also 'Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1850, vol. 1, pp. 180, 516; and 1851, vol. 1, p. 155; vol. 2, p. 337.) Ferric Chloride. Muriate of Iron. Perchloride of Iron.—This is usually met with as an acid solution in water or in rectified spirit. These solutions are of a red-brown colour, and are much employed as medicine. They are sometimes made with wood-spirit or methylated spirit, which gives to them a peculiar odour. Christison relates an instance in which a man, by mistake, swallowed an ounce and a half of such a liquid. The symptoms were somewhat like those produced by hydrochloric acid. He at first rallied, but died in about five weeks. The stomach was found partially inflamed, and thickened towards the intestinal end. The stronger solution of the British Pharmacopoeia is very potent when swallowed. A patient in Guy's Hospital swallowed


[156/872 b22652516_0156.jp2]

PREPARATIONS OF CHROMIUM. 144 in mistake a fluid drachm of the solution, and was strongly purged by it in a few minutes. Comparatively small doses of these solutions may seriously affect pregnant women; and among the criminal uses to which they have been put may be mentioned that of procuring abortion. A druggist was convicted {Reg. v. BumUe, Lincoln Lent Assizes, 1863) of having supplied the perchloride to a woman with the intent to procure her miscarriage. The health of the woman was greatly injured by the administration of the liquid. The editor has met with several instances of the administration of ferric chloride to pregnant women with the view of procuring abortion; and for this purpose it is commonly combined with aloes. Preparations of Chromium. Bichromate of Potassium, or Bichromate of Fotash.—Well-observed instances of poisoning by this compound, which is now extensively used in the arts, are rare; and therefore the details of the following case (' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 33, p. 734) are of interest. A man, set. 64, was found dead in his bed twelve hours after he had gone to rest: he had been heard to snore loudly, but this had occasioned no alarm to his relatives. When discovered, he was lying on his left side, his lower limbs being a little drawn up to his body: his countenance was pale, placid, and composed; the eyes and mouth were closed and the pupils dilated; there was no discharge from any of the outlets of the body; and there were no signs of vomiting or purging, nor any stain upon his hands or person, nor upon the bed-hnen or furniture. The surface was moderately warm. Some dye-stuff, in the form of a black powder, was found in his pocket. On inspection, the brain and its membranes were healthy and natural; there was neither congestion nor effusion in any part. The thoracic viscera were healthy, as well as those of the abdomen, with the exception of the liver which contained several hydatids. A pint of turbid, inky-looking fluid was found in the stomach. The mucous membrane was red and vascular, par- ticularly at the union of the greater end with the gullet: this was ascribed to the known intemperate habits of the deceased. In the absence of any obvious cause for death, poison was suspected; and on analyzing the contents of the stomach they were found to contain bichromate of potassium. The dye-powder taken from the man's pocket consisted of this salt mixed with cream of tartar and sand. The salt does not appear to have acted so much by its irritant properties, as by its effects on the nervous sj^stem. This, however, is by no means an unusual occurrence, even with irritants far more powerful than bichromate of potassium, A boy recovered from the effects of a dose of this salt, but only after the lapse of four months. The first symptoms were pain, vomiting, dilated and fixed pupils, cramps in the legs, and insensibility. His recovery was due to early and active treatment. ('Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1850, p. 216.) Another case in which, owing to timely treatment, a man, set. 37, recovered from a large dose of the salt, was communicated to the author. It seems that with


[157/872 b22652516_0157.jp2]

ANALYSIS. URANIUM. suicidal intent the man swallowed about two ounces of the bichromate in solution, mixed with pearl-ash. In about two hours he was seen by Andrews, and he was then apparently in a dying state. He was suffering chiefly from severe cramps, the pupils were dilated, the pulse was scarcely perceptible, and there was vomiting and purging, with greenish-coloured evacuations. The stomach-pump was used, and olive- oil and diluents were given. In about nine hours the urgent sjmaptoms abated, and the man complained only of great pain in the shoulders and legs. There was no gastric irritation nor tenderness of the abdomen. He was discharged, cured, at the end of a week. A woman, set. 24, died from the effects of this poison taken for the purpose of procuring abortion. The symptoms were those of an irritant—severe pain, vomiting, and purging. (Horn's ' Vierteljahrsschr.,' 1866, 2, 113.) This salt, in a state of fine powder, or in a saturated solution, has a local irritant action on the skin and on parts from which the skin has been removed- (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1864, 1, 83.) It produces what are called 'chronic sores,' affecting the hands and exposed parts of the face. According to recent observations, workers in chrome factories— of which there are only six in the world—suffer from a peculiar irri- tation of the septum of the nose, apparently due to the action of bichromate of potassium, which leads to a perforation of the nasal septum. ('Lancet,' 1882, i. p. 169.) Chromic acid is a powerful corro- sive poison, destroying all organic textures. ('Pharm. Jour.,' Jan. 1872, p. 568.) Chromate of Lead (Chrome Yellow) is a powerful irritant poison. A dose of a few grains of this pigment has proved fatal. (See case of two boys. ' N. Syd. Soc. Bien. Retrospect,' 1878-4, p. 452.) Analysis.—The bichromate may be recognized by its orange-red colour, as well as by the intense yellow colour which it gives to water when dissolved. Its solution gives a deep red precipitate with nitrate of silver, a pale yellow with nitrate of barium, and a bright yellow with salts of lead. Uranium. The compounds of this metal are now largely used in the arts, and cases of poisoning by it have occurred. Indeed it has recently been proposed to place it in the ofiScial Hst of poisons in Russia. Uranium salts cause severe inflammation of the gastro-intestinal mucous mem- brane, and of the kidneys, and are distinguished from the metallic poisons by acting directly on the walls of the blood-vessels, and render- ' ing also the blood reducible with difficulty. In this respect they ! resemble prussic acid. (See an abstract of the researches of Woro- schilsky in 'Pharm. Jour.,' 1890-1, p. 206.) These are the principal metallic irritants; but the compounds of tin, silver, gold, and osmium, have also an irritant action. Oases of poison- ing by these substances are, however, rare. (See ' On Poisons,' 3rd 1 edit. 1875.) L


[158/872 b22652516_0158.jp2]

146 VEGETABLE IRRITANTS. ALOES. VEGETABLE AND OTHEK lERITANTS. CHAPTER 15. VEGETABLE IRRITANTS. — ALOES. — GELSEMIUM. — SAVIN. — CROTON-OIL. — CASTOR-OIL.—COLCHICUM.—HELLEBORE.—VERATRINE.—CARBOLIC ACID. RESORCIN.— PETROLEUM.—ANIMAL IRRITANTS : CANTHARIDES.— NOXIOUS ANIMAL FOOD.— FISH.— MUSSELS.— CHEESE.— SAUSAGE POISON.— PORK.— TRICHINOSIS.—POISONED GAME.—PTOMAINES. General Remarks.—The poisonous substances of an irritant nature which belong to the vegetable kingdom are very numerous as a class ; but it will here be necessary to notice only those which have either caused death, or have given rise to accidental poisoning. Aloes. Colocynth. Gamboge. Jalap. Scammony.—These different substances, which are used in small doses as medicines, are liable, when taken frequently or in large quantities, to excite severe vomiting, purg- ing, and other symptoms of irritation. In one case a dose of colocynth (three pennyworth) proved fatal to a woman, set. 22. She was preg- nant, and had taken the drug for procuring abortion, for which purpose it is often used. It operated as a violent irritant. (' Pharm. Jour.,' June 22, 1878, p. 1035.) Christison recorded the death of a young woman from a teaspoonful and a half of the powdered pulp. Roques states that less than sixty grains of the powder, in decoction, has proved fatal; whilst recovery has taken place after three times that amount. (Husemann,' Handb. d. Toxicol.,' p. 625.) Hierapicra {Holy Bitter) was formerly a popular aloetic compound, and one death is recorded to have been produced by it in 1837-8. There is reason to believe that it is occasionally used for the purpose of procuring criminal abortion. A man was tried and convicted of this offence {Reg. v. White, Aylesbury Lent Ass., 1857), and the noxious properties of this compound then became a subject of legal inquiry. The dose, and the condition of the woman to whom it is administered, will of course affect the answer to this question. At the trial above mentioned, it was properly considered to be a noxious substance within the meaning of the statute. The fact that, under the name of Pulvis Aloes cum Canelld, it was formerly admitted into the British Pharma- copoeia, cannot justify the mischievous uses to which it may be put. Hierapicra is a snuff-coloured powder, of an intensely bitter taste. It consists of four parts by weight of aloes, and one part by weight of powdered Canella bark. The proper medicinal dose was formerly fixed at from five to fifteen grains. Its injurious effects on pregnant women are chiefly due to the aloes. This drug specially affects the rectum, and by contiguity, under violent irritation or purging, may affect the uterus. From the taste and colour which it imparts to liquids, it is not probable that it could be taken by a woman unknowingly.


[159/872 b22652516_0159.jp2]

YELLOW JASMINE. Yellow Jasmine (Gelsemium nitiduivi seu sempervirens). An alcoholic extract of the root of this plant, and a tincture, are used for medicinal purposes. It contains one, or perhaps two alkaloids, one of which paralyses, and the other tetanizes. Its solutions are fluorescent. It has acted as a poison and destroyed life, but its exact place as a poison cannot yet be satisfactorily assigned. In one case reported by Wormley ('Amer. Jour, of Pharm.,' Jan. 1870), it appears to have acted rather as an irritant than a narcotic. A young healthy married woman, several weeks advanced in preg- nancy, took by mistake three teaspoonfuls of fluid extract of gelsemium —a concentrated tincture of the root, containing 480 grains to the fluid ounce. In two hours after taking the extract she complained of pain in the stomach, nausea, and dimness of vision. These symptoms were followed by great restlessness, ineffectual efforts to vomit, and general perspiration. In four hours the pulse was feeble, irregular, and intermittent. There was great prostration, with irregular and slow breathing. The skin was dry, the limbs cold, the pupils dilated and insensible to light; the eyes were fixed, and there was inability to raise the eyelids. The vital powers rapidly gave way, and, without convulsions, death occurred in seven hours and a half after the poison had been taken. On inspection, the membranes and substances of the brain and spinal marrow were normal. The adipose tissue was tinged with bilious-looking matter. The lungs were collapsed, but natural in appearance, and the superficial veins were congested. The heart was normal—the superficial veins were injected, and the cavities were distended with dark grumous blood, inside of which was a well-defined fibrinous deposit. The stomach contained a small quantity of ingesta; the peritoneum and intestines were in a healthy state. The left kidney was congested. It will be seen from this account that, while death took place rapidly, there was nothing characteristic in the symptoms and appearances. A muscular man, twenty-eight years of age, after a drinking bout, took about two ounces of fluid extract of gelsemium, to 'quiet his nerves.' When seen, his face was flushed; he was dozing, but could easily be roused, and talked intelligently; the pupils were moderately dilated, reacting to light, and there was slight drooping of both eyelids. The pulse was strong and full, and about 100 per minute. An hour later, the dipsomaniac eluded his watchers, managed to get out to a drug-store, and procured half an ounce of fluid extract of gelsemium, which he drank. He was found twenty-five minutes later, sitting in a shop, with relaxed limbs and pale face; and he was capable of speech. As he refused to swallow an emetic, sulphate of zinc was administered through the nose. Copious vomiting followed this and a second dose that was given. In spite of this, he speedily became unconscious; pulse 130; respiration 40; and entirely thoracic; pupils moderately dilated, but acting. Brandy was given subcutaneously and by the rectum, and, after faradization of the diaphragm and intercostal muscles, he rallied from the state of collapse into which he had fallen,


[160/872 b22652516_0160.jp2]

148 SAVIN. CROTON-OIL. only to relapse shortly after, when the same measures were repeated. Hypodermic injections, first of atropine, then of carbonate of ammonium, and inhalation of nitrite of amyl, were employed. He died about five hours after taking the poison. (' Boston Med. and Surer. Jour.,' Dec. 22, 1881.) Savin {Juniperus Sabina).—This is a well-known plant of a re- markable odour, the leaves of which exert an irritant action both in the state of infusion and powder. They yield by distillation a light yellow acrid volatile oil, on which the irritant properties of the plant depend. The powder is sometimes used in medicine, in a dose of from five to twenty grains. Savin is not often taken as a poison for the specific purpose of destroying life; but this is occasionally an indirect result of its use as a popular means of procuring abortion. It acts by producing violent pain in the abdomen, vomiting, and strangury. After [death, the gullet, stomach, intestines, and kidneys, have been found either much inflamed or congested. It has no specific action as an abortive, but operates, like other irritants, by causing a violent shock to the system, under which the womb may expel its contents. Sach a result can never be obtained without placing in jeopardy the life of a woman; and thus, when abortion follows, she generally falls a victim. Oil of savin given with sul- Fig-1'^- phate of iron and aloes in the form of pills, is much used by criminal abor- tionists after instrumental interference, during the earlier months of preg- nancy. {Beg. V. Phillips, C. C. C, Feb. 1885.) The presence of savin in powder in the stomach and bowels may be recog- nized by the peculiar odour, and by the presence of microscopic fragments (see Fig. 17) of the plant. The woody tissue of the plant has the character- istic dots of coniferous woody tissue. Yew has a similar structure, but is Tips of the leaves of Savin, magnified destitute of the true savin odour. Yew 30 diameters. and savm are the chief poisonous coniferse of this country. Yew berries are highly poisonous; but the luscious pulp forming the exterior of the so-called berry is innocent. Croton-oil.—This is an oil extracted from the seeds of the Croton tiglium. It is a powerful drastic purgative, producing, in a large dose, severe purging, collapse, and death. A case occurred in Paris, in 1839, in which a man swallowed by mistake two drachms and a half of croton-oil. In three quarters of an hour the surface was cold and clammy, the pulse imperceptible, the breathing difficult, and the ex- tremities and face were as blue as in the collapsed stage of cholera. In


[161/872 b22652516_0161.jp2]

CASTOR-OIL. COLCHICUM. 149 an hour and a half purging set in ; the stools were passed involuntarily, and the abdomen was very sensitive to the touch. The patient com- plained of a burning pain in the course of the gullet. He died in four hours after swallowing the poison. There was no marked change in the mucous membrane of the stomach. (For another fatal case, see 'Pharm. Jour.,' Feb. 1863, p. 379.) Castor-oil.—The seeds of the castor-oil plant are occasionally fatally poisonous to children, who are attracted by their beautifully mottled appearance. They act as a powerful drastic. Three seeds have destroyed the life of an adult. ('Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1861, i. p. 555. See also 'Ann. de Therap.,' 1872, p. 103; and 'Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1871, i. p. 400.) Meadow-Saffron (Colckicum).—Meadow-saffron (Colchicum autum- nale) contains a poisonous alkaloid—colchicine. The most noxious parts of the plant are the corms (or roots) and seeds, but the leaves and flowers have also an irritant action. Symptoms and Appearances.—The symptoms in cases of poisoning by colchicum are generally well marked. There is burning pain in the throat and stomach, intense thirst, violent vomiting and purging leading rapidly to exhaustion, coldness and clamminess of the skin, excessive depression, and great weakness. The pulse is small, weak, and fluttering; and death appears to take place from exhaustion, without convulsions or loss of consciousness. Among four cases (infra) presenting these symptoms, one person died on the second, one on the fifth, one on the eighth, and one on the fourteenth day. In another case of poisoning by wine of colchicum, the symptoms did not come on for an hour and a half; there was then copious vomiting of a yellow fluid, severe pain with great tenderness in the abdomen, tenesmus, and thirst. The patient died in forty-eight hours, without being convulsed or manifesting any sign of cerebral disturbance. A woman, who took an ounce and a quarter of the wine, recovered in about twenty-four hours. She sufiered chiefly from severe griping pains. The pupils were contracted, and the heart's action was very feeble. The after-symptoms were headache and nausea. (' Lancet,' 1877, i. p. 263,) T'^e chief morbid appearance was a patch of redness on the mucous membrane of the stomach, near the cardiac orifice ; the intestines were slightly inflamed. The brain was not examined. (' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 10, p. 161; see also Casper, ' Gerichtl. Med.') In a case of poisoning by the medicinal administration of colchicum, three drachms and a half of the wine of colchicum were taken in divided doses, and caused death on the fourth day. There was no inflammation of the mucous membrane, but simply extravasation of blood into the mucous folhcles. The mucous membrane has been found softened in two cases of poisoning by the tincture. In two other cases, in which an ounce and a half of the tincture was taken, and death ensued in forty-eight hours, no morbid appearances were found. (Casper, ' Gerichtl. Med.;' and see ' Vierteljahrsschr. f. Gerichtl. Med.,' 1860, vol. 1, p. 1.)


[162/872 b22652516_0162.jp2]

POISONING WITH COLCHICUM. Colchicum has acquired an evil notoriety as a poison. A woman {Beg. V. Catherine Wilson^ C. C. C, Sept. 1862), after having been tried and acquitted for an attempt to poison, with oil of vitriol, the wife of a man with whom she cohabited, was in the following September convicted of the murder of a Mrs. Soames, who had died suddenly while nursed by the prisoner six years previously. The body was exhumed, but no poison was found in the remains; yet the medical and other circumstances, as well as the conduct and corre- spondence of the prisoner, proved to the satisfaction of the Court that deceased had been destroyed by vegetable poison, most probably colchi- cum, with the noxious properties of which she was proved to have been well acquainted. From the facts which transpired in reference to this trial, it appeared that the deceased was one of four persons who had at different dates fallen victims to the acts of this woman. 1. Peter Mawer, a master mariner of Boston, died in October, 1854 : the body was exhumed in 1862, but no poison was detected. 2. Mrs. Jackson^ of Boston, who died in December, 1859: the body was exhumed in January, 1860, and no poison detected. 3. Mrs. Atkinson, of Kirkby Lonsdale, who died in October, 1860: the body was exhumed in May, 1862, and no poison detected. 4. Mrs. Soames, above mentioned. All these persons died suddenly while in a state of health, under similar symptoms, and without any apparent natural cause to account for death. The symptoms as a whole were not reconcilable with any known disease; and they only appeared after the prisoner was proved to have administered, under some pretence or other, food or medicine, the bottle which she employed for this purpose being kept locked up or in her own possession. The motive for the murder in each case was the acquisition of money or property of which the prisoner came into possession—in Peter Mawer's case by a will made shortly before his death, and in Mrs. Atkinson's case by an act of robbery after her death. Two other attempts at murder, which failed, led to the inference that colchicum was the substance which this woman employed, either in wine or brandy. In these four persons the symptoms were as nearly as possible of the same character—burning pain in the throat and stomach, intense thirst, violent vomiting and purging, coldness and clamminess of the skin, excessive depression, and great weakness. The pulse was small and weak, and death appeared to take place from exhaustion, without convulsions or loss of consciousness. In most of the cases the poison was probably given in divided doses; in the last case, the symptoms appeared regularly every evening after the deceased had taken the tea prepared by the prisoner. [Grave doubts have, how- ever, been entertained by experts as to the kind of poison administered : the author's opinion as to its being colchicum is not univei-sally shared by toxicologists.—Editor,] Colchicine.—The noxious properties of colchicum are owing to the presence of this alkaloid. It ma3'^be separated from liquids containing it by a process similar to that described for strychnine. It is, however, but little known in toxicology.


[163/872 b22652516_0163.jp2]

POISONING WITH HELLEBORE. Hellebore.—Symptoms and Appearances.—According to Wibmer, the roots of tlie black hellebore {Hellehorus niger) possess the greatest activity; but the leaves are also highly poisonous when used in the form of infusion. By long boiling the poisonous properties of the plant are diminished, probably owing to the loss of the volatile principle. The roots and leaves have a local irritant action, producing in small doses violent vomiting and purging, with severe pain in the abdomen, followed by cold sweats, convulsions, insensibility, and death. The powdered root, in a dose of a few grains, acts like a drastic purgative. In a case reported by Morgagni, half a drachm of the aqueous extract killed a man, set. 50, in eight hours. The symptoms were severe pain in the abdomen and violent vomiting. After death the whole of the alimentary canal was found inflamed, but especially the large intestines. A case is quoted by the same writer in which a table-spoonful of the finely powdered root (taken by mistake for rhubarb) caused severe symptoms of irritant poisoning, which did not disappear for four hours. The man recovered on the fourth day. The experiments performed by Orfila on animals show that this poison acts like a local irritant when applied to a wound. Hellebore is a favourite remedy for worms among quacks. It is not, therefore, surprising that it should be occasionally administered in an overdose, and cause death. Edwards met with a case in which a gentleman had swallowed experimentally one drachm of tincture of green hellebore (Veratrum viride), equal to twelve grains of the powder. He was found soon afterwards in a collapsed state, with sunk features, cold skin, covered with a profuse clammy sweat, and pulse scarcely perceptible. He complained of intense pain in the region of the stomach. There was no purging. These symptoms were relieved by treatment, and the next morning the patient had recovered. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1863, 1, p. 5.) Veratrine.—White hellebore {Veratrum album) owes its noxious properties to the alkaloid veratrine or veratria^ which is itself a power- ful poison. The alkaloid is prepared from the cevadilla seeds. Calla- way communicated to the author the following case: A physician prescribed medicinally for a lady one grain of veratrine divided into fifty pills, and three were directed to be taken for a dose. Not long after the dose had been swallowed, the patient was found insensible, the surface cold, the pulse failing, and there was every symptom of approaching dissolution. She remained some hours in a doubtful condition, but ultimately recovered. Supposing the medicine to have been well mixed, and the pUls equally divided, not more than one- sixteenth of a grain of veratrine was here taken. The common vera- trine of the shops is sometimes given medicinally, in doses of one-sixth of a grain. Poisoning by veratrine is a rare occurrence. We have not met with an instance in which this alkaloid has been indubitably administered with criminal intention. Judging from its effects on animals, it would cause vomiting and convulsions, with insensibility. Analysis.—In the state in which it is usually seen, it is a whitish powder, scarcely soluble in boiling water, but dissolved by alcohol.


[164/872 b22652516_0164.jp2]

152 POISONING WITH VERATRINE. CARBOLIC ACID. ether, and benzene. Acids readily dissolve it, forming salts which on evaporation do not yield crystals. The powder has a hot, acrid taste, and if any portion enters the nostrils, it causes most violent sneezing, lasting for some time. Strong nitric acid gives to the powder a light-red colour, becoming ochreous after a time. Hydrochloric acid, strong or diluted, with the aid of heat, produces a beautiful red tint. The best test for its presence is diluted sulphuric acid, which, on gentle heating, strikes a rich pink colour, which is destroyed by a solution of chlorine, but not by stannous chloride. Strong sulphuric acid turns the powder yellow, but on heating the mixture, the colour deepens, and finally becomes a deep red ; and when the liquid is diluted, it passes to a dingy yellow. Veratrine undergoes no change when mixed with iodic acid, but it gives immediately, with sulphomolybdic acid, a deep greenish-yellow colour passing to a brown red. Veratrine is insoluble in water. It may be brought into solution in organic hquids by warming with acetic acid. The Hquid is treated with potash and then shaken with two parts of benzene. The alkaloid, if present, is obtained by decanting and evaporating the benzene solution. The tests may then be appHed to it. It has not yet been detected in the tissues. The editor had a case referred to him in which a woman died about twenty minutes after taking some gruel. A medical man thought that he detected veratrine in the viscera and in the gruel. The editor, however, detected strychnine in these articles ; and the post-mortem appearances were those of strychnine. A case occurred in 1865, in which death was attributed to the action of vera- trine criminally administered. The deceased, a woman, was advanced in pregnancy, and from the medical evidence she died from puerperal convulsions and Bright's disease of the kidney, with effiision of blood on the brain. It was said that veratrine was detected in her body and in the urine, but there were no symptoms of poisoning by veratrine, and there was no evidence of administration by any one. The chemical analysis was not published, or it might have appeared that too great a reliance had been placed upon the tests employed. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1865, ii. p. 472.) It was probably a case of death from natural causes mistaken for poisoning. Caebolic Acid. Carholic Acid, Phenic Acid, or Phenol, is a crystalline product of the distillation of coal-tar. The medicinal acid melts at 91^° F. It has a characteristic and not unpleasant odour. When a small propor- tion of water is added to the crystals, they liquefy. It is moderately soluble in water. The commercial crystals often have an unpleasant odour, due to impurities; and they acquire a red colour on exposure to light. More commonly carbolic acid is met with as either a colour- less or more or less brown hquid, of nauseous odour, containing about 80 per cent, of phenol; or as a dark brown liquid chiefly consisting of heavy oil of tar, with about 30 per cent, of the acid. These are largely used as disinfectants. Apphed to the skin or to a mucous membrane, it coagulates the albuminous constituents, causing a severe burning pain


[165/872 b22652516_0165.jp2]

SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES. FATAL DOSE. and a white eschar. A death is stated to have occurred from the external use of the acid (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1870, ii. p. 382); and its use as an antiseptic lotion has repeatedly produced serious, if not fatal, results. Deaths from the internal use of carbolic acid—usually accidental, but not infrequently suicidal—are now common. Carbolic acid, so called, does not redden Htmus. Symptoms and Appearances.—When the poison is swallowed in solution, or in the form of undiluted liquid, the patient experiences a hot burning sensation, extending from the mouth to the stomach. This feeling is experienced during the act of swallowing; and the lining membrane of the mouth is whitened and hardened. Carbolic acid is rapidly absorbed, and in the course of a few minutes the system may be profoundly affected. In two instances the rapidity of action was comparable to that of prussic acid. Although the local applica- tion of the acid to a part is commonly followed by severe burning pain, this may be entirely absent in cases of poisoning by this agent, and even a local diminution of sensibility may be produced. Nervous symptoms are those most strikingly manifested, such as delirium, giddiness, and profound insensibility. Nausea and vomiting may be present or absent. These symptoms may, however, be severe and un- controllable. There is extreme feebleness of the pulse, and dry harsh skin, with Hvidity of the surface. The urine, as was first pointed out by the editor (' Guy's Hosp. Eep.,' 1868, p. 407), is often of an olive- green or even black hue ; but this appearance is more common in sub- acute than in acute and rapidly fatal cases. The pupils are generally minutely contracted. Convulsions and trismus are not infrequently observed. A case of carbolic-acid poisoning can rarely fail to be recognized. The whitening of the mouth, the brown eschars which form on the skin at its angles where the poison trickles from the mouth, the odour of the breath, and the profound insensibility and stertorous breathing, with minutely contracted pupils, rarely leave any doubt as to the nature of the case. The editor has, nevertheless, met with a case in which, a rather pure form of the acid having been taken for suicidal purposes, the odour of carbohc acid escaped notice. Fatal Period.—Death has several times occurred within twenty minutes of the administration of the poison; and in one case a man, after swallowing a fluid ounce of the liquid acid, died in less than three minutes. (' Philad. Med. Times,' vol. ii. p. 284.) In 1886, a man suffering from diseased hver, the result of intemperate habits, whilst in his ordinary health, swallowed, by mistake, eighty grains of the crystals, dissolved in two fluid ounces of a dilute solution of bicarbonate of sodium and sal volatile. He died within the space of two or three minutes. Death usually supervenes within four hours. Occasionally, in fatal cases, life may be prolonged for twenty-four and even forty- eight hours. Fatal Dose.—This is unknown. There is reason to beheve that, if absorbed, a few grains of the poison might prove fatal, and six or seven drops have produced serious results. Eighty grains have killed an adult; {vide supra.) Two fluid drachms of the liquid acid have killed a child,


[166/872 b22652516_0166.jp2]

154 CARBOLIC ACID. RESORCIN. two years of age, in twelve hours. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1867, p. 233.) In one case a child, six months old, was killed by the administration of a quarter of a teaspoonful of the acid dissolved in glycerine—one part of acid to five of glycerine. ('Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1882, i. p. 748.) Recovery has, however, taken place after large doses have been taken. A girl, set. 14, swallowed six fluid drachms of the undiluted (30 per cent.) acid. In twenty minutes she was comatose and breathing stertorously; her face was livid, the pulse was small and irregular; the pupils contracted, but not so much as in opium-poisoning. The stomach was washed out with soap and water, and then with milk and water. In an hour the lividity diminished, and consciousness slowly returned. She did not complain of any gastric irritation. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1882, i. p. 939.) A robust woman, set. 30, swallowed nearly half an ounce of an alcoholic solution of carbolic acid, containing 35-8 per cent, of the poison. It was ascertained that, by the use of the stomach- pump, rather more than half of the poison was removed from the stomach, but that at least 92 grains of the poison were left for absorption. The most prominent symptoms were insensibility within ten minutes, and dizziness speedily passing into profound coma, irregular breathing and pulse, contracted pupils, extreme blueness (cyanosis) of the surface of the body, depression of the body temperature to 94° F., and hsemoglobinuria, i.e. the presence of unaltered blood-pigment in the urine, which contained no red blood-corpuscles. This last condition set in one hour after the poison was taken, and lasted for seven hours and a half. The urine reacted for carbolic acid during two days. The woman recovered. (' Berlin Klin. Wochenschr.,' 1881, No. 48.) Analysis.—Carbolic acid gives a purple colour when a drop of solu- tion of ferric chloride is added. When in solution, it yields a copious precipitate of tribromophenol when an excess of bromine-water is added. This precipitate, when washed on a filter and treated with sodium analgam, again yields phenol (carbolic acid) after acidification. To detect carbolic acid in viscera, vomit, urine, etc., acidulate the suspected material with sulphuric acid, and distil, using suitable con- densing arrangement. The distillate may have the odour of phenol. It is precipitated with an excess of bromine water; the precipitate is washed with water on a filter, and, whilst still moist, treated with sodium amalgam in water or alcohol. After a time, on acidifying the solution, the peculiar odour of carbolic acid will be perceived. By shaking the mixture with ether, pipetting off" the ether, and evaporating it in watch- glasses, oily streaks of phenol will be left; these may be tested with ferric chloride as described above. Resorcik. Resorcin is an antiseptic. It is a phenol, i.e. a body closely allied to carbolic acid, crystallizing in colourless cr3''stals, which are readily soluble in water, ether, or alcohol. Applied in the form of crystals, it acts as a powerful caustic to the skin. The commercial resorcin, which is obtained as a by-product in the manufacture of a pigment known as


[167/872 b22652516_0167.jp2]

PYROGALLIC ACID. PETROLEUM. eosine, has a red colour, and a powerful odour resembling that of carbolic acid. It is used internally as a medicine. On one occasion, in which an overdose of two drachms was given to a young woman, it produced decided toxic symptoms—insensibihty, profuse perspiration, blanched lips, lowness of body temperature, imperceptible pulse, and almost imperceptible breathing. The pupils were normal. The urine was olive-green in colour. The patient recovered. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1881, ii. p. 487.) It thus appears that resorcin acts like carbolic acid on the human organism. Pyrogallic Acid (Pyeogallin). This substance is largely used in photography, and also as a hair-dye. It is a poison, arresting oxidation in the body by removing and ab- sorbing oxygen. Petroleum. Under the term petroleum, or rock-oil, are included various oils used for illuminating purposes, of peculiar odour, which spring from the ground in various parts of the globe; and consist of mixtures of various inflammable hydro-carbons. The illuminants which were in use prior to the introduction of American petroleum, as paraffin-oil, solar- oil, photogene, etc, possess analogous composition. Cases of petroleum- poisoning are rare, considering the frequent use of this well-known sub- stance. The majority of cases arise from drinking out of bottles supposed to contain spirituous liquors, although there have occurred a few cases of intentional poisoning by this liquid ; for instance, a case at Brescia (' Jour, de Chim. Med.,' Nov. 1866, p. 597); and another in the pro- vince of Posen, particulars of which are wanting. In general the poisonous properties of petroleum, such as the purified American variety, cannot be rated very high; but many varieties of crude petro- leum, on account of their containing sulphur compounds, are much more poisonous, according to Bulenberg, as, for instance, crude petro- leum from Canada. In adults a wine-glassful may not kill, and in one case, that of Mayer, in Antwerp, five fluid ounces did not cause death. According to Kohler (' Physiol. Ther.,' p. 347), half a wine-bottleful is not a fatal dose for an adult. Even in the case of children, among whom the editor has seen several cases, the fatal dose is a very large one; and in the event of death supervening, it is due rather to the secondary result of local action of the poison on the stomach and intestines than to the result of the absorption of hydro-carbons. In cases of poisoning, generally after vomiting follow giddiness, a sense of fulness of the head, with pain and feeling of constriction; and in chil- dren, coUapse, somnolence, pallor of the face, coldness of the skin, cold sweats, and weak pulse may supervene. Neither the behaviour of the pulse, nor of the pupils, is constant. In collapse, the latter are dilated; and in an excited condition they appear contracted. For the diagnosis, the odour of petroleum in the breath is generally a safe guide. Eruc- tations and vomiting also betray the presence of petroleum. Finally,


[168/872 b22652516_0168.jp2]

A^JIMAL IRRITANTS. CANTHARIDES. 156 the urine may acquire a peculiar odour, which may last for several days. In Mayer^s case this odour resembled that odour of violets which the urine acquires after the ingestion of oil of turpentine and other essential oils. Analysis.—The detection of petroleum, either in the vomited matters or in the contents of the stomach, is eflfected by distilling the suspected matters, and determining the chemical and physical properties of the distillate. Animal Ireitants. Cantharides. (Spanish Flies.)—Symptoms.—When cantharides are taken in powder, in a dose of one or two drachms, they give rise to the following symptoms : a burning sensation in the throat, great difficulty of swallowing, violent pain in the abdomen, with nausea and vomiting of a bloody mucus; there is also great thirst, with dryness of the fauces. As the case proceeds, a heavy dull pain is commonly ex- perienced in the loins, and there is an incessant desire to void urine; but only a small quantity of blood, or bloody urine, is passed at each effort. The abdominal pain becomes of a violent griping kind. Purging supervenes, but this is not always observed; the matters discharged from the bowels are mixed with blood and mucus, and there is often tenesmus (straining). In these, as well as in the vomited liquors, shining green or copper-coloured particles may be commonly seen on examination, whereby the nature of the poison taken, if it has been taken in powder, will be at once indicated. After a time, there is priapism, and the genital organs are swollen and inflamed both in the male and female. When the case proves fatal, death is usually pre- ceded by faintness, giddiness, and convulsions. The tincture of can- tharides produces similar symptoms: they are, however, more speedily induced, and the burning sensation in the stomach and constriction of the throat are more strongly marked; this symptom is often so severe as to render it impossible for the person to swallow; and the act of swallowing gives rise to excruciating pain in the throat and abdomen. (For the sjnuptoms and appearances in a case in which three ounces of the tincture proved fatal, see ' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1876, i. p. 191.) Appearances.—In one well-marked case, the whole of the alimentary canal, from the mouth downwards, was in a state of inflammation. The mouth and tongue seemed to be deprived of their mucous mem- brane. The ureters, kidneys, and internal organs of generation were also inflamed. In another instance, in which an ounce of the tincture was swallowed, and death did not occur for fourteen days, the mucous membrane of the stomach was not inflamed; but it was pulpy, and easily detached. The kidneys were, however, inflamed. The brain has been found congested, and ulceration of the bladder is said to have been met with. There are few fatal cases reported in which the appearances have been accurately noted; indeed, the greater number of those persons who have taken this poison have recovered. The quantity required to produce serious symptoms, or to destroy


[169/872 b22652516_0169.jp2]

SPANISH FLIES. life, has been a frequent subject of medico-legal inquiry. The medi- cinal dose of the tincture is from five to ten minims, but may be gradually increased to one fluid drachm; of the powder from a quarter up to two grains. Doses above these, whether of the powder or the tincture, are likely to be injurious, and to give rise to sjmaptoms of poisoning. The smallest quantity of the powder which has been hitherto known to destroy life, was in the case of a young woman, quoted by Orfila; the quantity taken was estimated at twenty-four grains in two doses. She died in four days ; but as abortion preceded death, this may have been concerned in accelerating that event. An ounce of the tincture taken by a boy, set. 17, caused death in fourteen days. This is the smallest recorded dose of the tincture which has proved fatal. It must not be inferred from this statement that a smaller quantity of the powder or tincture will not destroy life. The actual dose of either required to prove fatal is unknown. Many more observations are required to determine this point. In Beg. v. Hennah (Cornwall Lent Ass., 1877), it was wrongly inferred that it would require at least twenty-four grains of the powder to destroy life. There is nothing to prevent half of this quantity from proving fatal; this is Fig- is. purely a matter of experience. It is at present impossible to assign any defi- nite quantity as a minimum fatal dose. Chemical Analysis.—For the de- tection of the powder, the sediment obtained from the suspected liquids should be mixed with alcohol spread on sheets of glass, and allowed to dry spontaneously. The shining scales of the powdered elytra will then be seen, on examining the glass by reflected light, either on one or both surfaces. As the powder is insoluble in water, some portion of it may generally be Crystals of Cantharidin from a solution obtained by washing and decanta- in chloroform, magaified 30 diameters. tion. The sediment may then be examined on a glass slide with the microscope. If no portion of the powdered beetles can be discovered, the suspected liquids or sohds should be evaporated to dryness, and the dry residue digested in successive quantities of ether until exhausted. This will dissolve the cantharidm, the active principle, which forms only the l-250th part of the elytra of the beetle. The ethereal solutions are evaporated to an extract, and some of this extract, spread on oil-silk, may be applied to a thin portion of the skin of the arm or to the lips. The production of a blister, with serum, under these circumstances, is considered to indicate the presence of cantharidin. By this method Barruel discovered cantharides in chocolate. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1835, i. p. 455.) Chloroform is even a more powerful solvent of cantharidin than ether, and may be used in preference (Fig. 18). As the extract contains frequently a green


[170/872 b22652516_0170.jp2]

NOXIOUS ANIMAL FOOD. oil and fat, which prevent cantharidin from crystaUizing, it has been recommended to employ disulphide of carbon in order to separate these impurities, the cantharidin not being soluble in the disulphide, while the fat is removed. Noxious Animal Food. Certain kinds of animal food are occasionally found to produce symptoms resembling those of irritant poisoning. In some instances this poisonous effect appears to be due to idiosyncrasy;. for only one person out of several partaking of the food may be affected. These cases are of importance to the medical jurist, since they may give rise to unfounded charges of criminal poisoning. In the absence of any demonstrable poison, we must test the question of idiosjnicrasy by observing whether more than one person is affected, and whether the same kind of food, given to animals, producer symptoms of poisoning. If, with this latter condition, several persons are affected simultaneously with similar symptoms, we cannot refer the effects to idiosyncrasy; they are most probably due to- the presence of an animal poison. Among the articles of food which have caused symptoms of irritant poisoning, may be mentioned certahi shell-fish (mussels), bacon, sausages, diseased pork, and animal flesh in a diseased or putrescent state. The flesh of the most healthy animal is rendered unfit for food when it is putrescent. It is not merely unwholesome, but highly irritant, rapidly causing vomiting,, purging, pain, and other symptoms of a severe kind. Fortunately, these symptoms lead at once- to the expul- sion of the noxious food from the body, and the person then recovers: the young, the old, and the infirm may, however, be so prostrated by excessive vomiting and' purging that they may sink from exhaustion. Thorough cooking destroys the noxious effects of such food. Animal matter in a state of partial decay, or in the transition stage of putre- faction, must also be regarded as of a poisonous nature. In 1851, the family of a surgeon near London were all affected with symptoms resembling irritant poisoning, after having partaken of a hare which had been stewed in a clean earthen vessel. On the second day, the wife was seized with vomiting and purging, giddiness, heat in the throat, general numbness, and inflamed eyes. Other members of the family vomited, and in the course of a few days the symptoms disappeared. The vomited matter consisted of portions of the hare partially digested, but in a state of putrefaction, so that there was abundant evidence of sulphuretted hydrogen in the liquid. There was no mineral poison, although the symptoms, it will be observed, were rather like those occasioned by arsenic. It had been remarked by the family that a silver spoon, which had been used in serving out this unwholesome food, was turned of a brown colour, no doubt from' the chemical action of sulphuretted hydrogen; and this may be taken as a good domestic test of the putrefied condition of such food. Nature generally applies an appropriate remedy, in the fact that the food itself produces copious vomiting and purging. (See ' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1877, ii. p. 450.) Cases of this kind must be distinguished from those in which poisoned


[171/872 b22652516_0171.jp2]

POISONOUS FISH. MUSSELS. CHEESE. game is sold to the public. The game may be quite free from putre- faction, but noxious from the poisoned grain which may have caused death. It was formerly a very common practice to steep grain in a solution of arsenic, previous to sowing, and pheasants, partridges, and other birds may be accidentally destroyed by eating such grain. In some instances grouse and other game are maliciously destroyed by the laying of com, saturated with arsenic or other poisons, in the localities where the birds abound. There is no precaution which can be taken by the purchasers of game, except by observing whether the birds have or have not been shot. It is doubtful whether the Sale of Food and Drugs Act (38 & 39 Vict, c. 62, s. 6) does not meet such cases;; but no prosecution has up to this time been instituted under that statute for the sale of poisoned game. In 1887, an outbreak of poisoning from food occurred near Carlisle, the symptoms much resembling those of arsenic ('Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1887, i. p. 123); and another outbreak occurred in the same year at Winsford, in Cheshire, in which, besides vomiting and purging, a great rise of body temperature (to 104° F.) was noticeable. {Ibid., 1887, ii. p. 521.) These cases were supposed to be due to ptomaines. Poisonous Fish. Mussels.-—Of all the varieties of shell-fish, none have so frequently given rise to accidents as the common mussel. The symptoms which it produces are uneasiness and sense of weight in the stomach; a sensation of numbness in the extremities; heat, dryness, and constriction in the mouth and throat; thirst, shivering, difficulty of breathing, cramps in the legs, swelling and inflamma- tion of the eyelids, a profuse secretion of tears, and heat and itching of the skin, followed by an eruption resembhng nettle-rash. These symptoms are sometimes accompanied by colic, vomiting, and purging. They may occur within ten minutes or a quarter of an hour; but their appearance has been delayed for twenty-four hours. There is generally great exhaustion and debility. These symptoms have proceeded from the eating of not more than ten or twelve mussels. Two cases reported by Christison proved fatal; the one in three, the other in about seven hours. In general, however, especially when there is free vomiting, the patients recover. In the inspection of the two fatal cases above mentioned, no appearance was found to account for death. A case in which two mussels produced, in a boy aged 10, alarming symptoms, followed by an eruption re- sembling scarlatina and nettle-rash, is reported.. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1850, p. 213.) The active agent in mussel-poisoning is not known with certainty,, but is by some asserted to be an alkaloid. Cheese.—The symptoms produced by cheese have been those of irritant poisoning. The poison is asserted by Vaughan to be in some cases a ptomaine, tyrotoxicon (see p.-164). Again, it has been supposed that the poison is occasionally derived from certain vegetables on which the cows feed. In 1858, twenty-five persons suffered from vomiting and purging, more or less violent, owing to their having partaken of cheese. Sausage-Poison,—The symptoms caused by sausage-poison partake


[172/872 b22652516_0172.jp2]

i6o SAUSAGE-POISON. of a narcotico-irritant character; they are very slow in appearing— sometimes two, three, or four days may elapse before they manifest themselves. This poison is of a formidable kind ; its effects have been chiefly observed in Germany. In the ' Medical Gazette' for Nov. 1842, there is an account of the cases of three persons, who had died from the effects of liver-sausages, which had been made from an apparently healthy pig, slaughtered only a week before. The in- spection threw no light on the cause of death. The poisonous property was supposed to depend on partial decomposition of the fatty part of the sausages. It is said that when extremely putrefied they are not poisonous. In one case, a few slices of a German sausage, of old manufacture but not putrescent, caused the death of a child, with violent symptoms of irritation of the stomach and bowels. The author examined a portion of the sausage: it contained no poisonous matter which could be detected. The fatty portions were rancid, and the lean portions very dry. There was no doubt, however, that it had been the cause of the symptoms and death of the child. Tripe published a com- plete account of the effects produced by sausage-poison. (' Brit, and For. Med. Rev.,' Jan. 1860, p. 197.) It appears that in Nov. 1859 sausages made and sold by a pork-butcher at Kingsland were eaten more or less by sixty-six persons, of whom sixty-four were attacked by violent symptoms of irritation in from three and a half to thirty- six hours after the meal. One case only proved fatal, on the seventh day. No symptoms appeared in this man until after the lapse of six hours. It seems that he had eaten one of the sausages raw, and three cooked. He was attacked with severe vomiting and purging, followed by shivering; there was pain in the abdomen, violent headache, and great prostration. The pulse was feeble and quick, and there was delirium. These symptoms underwent a remission, but he had a relapse, became comatose, and died on the seventh day. Latterly he chiefly complained of pain in the bowels. On inspection, Letheby found no signs of inflammation, or of the action of an irritant on the stomach. The small intestines were much inflamed at the lower end, and the gall-bladder was distended. The other organs were healthy. The viscera contained no known vegetable or mineral poison. The sausages were made of heifer-beef, pork fat, sage, and pepper. There was no evidence of anything noxious about them, and a chemical analysis yielded nothing of a poisonous nature. There could, however, be no doubt that the sausages had caused the symptoms and death ; the food in this case acting as a narcotico-irritant poison. Other persons suSered from burning in the throat and stomach, followed by vomiting and purging; then giddiness or confusion in the head, and in some there was delirium. In the man who died, the delirium was well marked, and the eyes were red. In those persons who recovered, the noxious animal matter was probably early thrown off by vomiting and purging. It is supposed that the poison is a ptomaine. Pork. Bacon.—These common articles of food occasionally give rise to symptoms so closely resembling those of irritant poisoning as to be easily mistaken for them. In some cases the effect appears to be


[173/872 b22652516_0173.jp2]

PORK. BACON. due to idiosyncrasy; but in others it can be explained only by sup- posing the food to have a directly poisonous action. The noxious eifects of pork have been particularly shown by the cases published bv McDivitt. ('Ed. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' Oct. 1836.) As pork is sometimes salted in leaden vessels, lead may be found in it; but fresh pork has been observed to have a noxious action. In 1864, Kesteven met with a case in which all the members of a family were attacked with symptoms of irritant poisoning after eating a leg of pork. The principal symptoms were nausea, vomiting, griping pains in the abdo- men, and purging; but dogs and cats fed upon the meat did not appear to suffer. Other portions of the animal from which the leg was taken were eaten by other families, and no symptoms of poisoning were produced. The author examined the food without discovering any trace of the ordinary poisons. These cases of poisoning by animal food have been examined by Simon and Gamgee. They have traced the injurious effects of pork to a diseased condition of the pig, owing to the animal having been fed on improper food. The term, ' measly pork,' is now known to consist in a diseased condition of the flesh of the animal, in which it is filled with a parasite called cysti- cercus, which is the larva of the tapeworm, (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1870, 1, p. 485.) This parasite undergoes full development when in the shape of food it reaches the human intestines. These parasites may not directly kill a person who eats this noxious food, but they favour the development of fatal disease. In reference to the possible ill effects from consuming, in a well-cooked state, the flesh of animals afflicted with anthrax, or carbuncular fever, evidence is still imperfect. An opinion has been expressed that boils, and perhaps other like afflic- tions, are caused in human beings by the consumption of diseased meat. A large amount of diseased and unwholesome meat is sold to the public, and of the various kinds of flesh used as food, none is so subject to disease as pork. Some of the changes which it undergoes are of a microscopical character, and are not noticed. For an account of the diseases affecting the flesh of the pig, their mode of production, and the prevention of accidents, see papers by Delpech, in the ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1864, vol. 1, pp. 5, 241. The parasites found in the flesh of this and other animals are apt to escape destruction by boiling, roasting, or smoking, and those are liable to suffer most who habitually eat the raw or partly cooked flesh. The flesh of the pig containing cysticerci presents, in the cooked state, the following appearances : when boiled it is paler than sound meat; it appears dryer in patches, and the muscular fibres are more separated than usual. When these are opened, the parasites are seen in the interstices as opaque white spots, of the size of a hemp seed, and presenting much the same aspect as when li^dng. The caudal bladder attached to their bodies dis- appears when the meat is thoroughly cooked, and the body of the animal then appears isolated in the middle of the muscular tissue. It is friable, and breaks down easily under pressure, with a crackKng sound, owing to the presence of calcareous matter. In this state it does not appear to be necessarily productive of injury. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1864, M


[174/872 b22652516_0174.jp2]

l62 CYSTICERCI. TRICHINA. 1, p. 249.) All the members of a family were seized with vomiting, purging, and syncope, after having eaten a dish of pork. A medical man examined the meat, and found it full of cysticerci. A pork-butcher was accused of having sold bad meat, but it was proved to have been some cheap pork bought of a hawker of provisions. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1864,1, p. 246.) If the cysticerci did not cause the symptoms in this case, the meat had undergone some change sufficient to impart to it irritant properties. These parasites occur in all the fleshy parts of the body. They are not commonly found in the fatty portions of man or animals, and are less common in sheep and oxen than in pigs. In two instances, Ballard and Klein were able to trace conclusively that the poisonous effects of hams which had caused illness and death were due to the presence of bacilli; and these observations have been confirmed by other observers. In the Supplement to the Tenth Annual Keport of the Local Government Board will be found instructive cases of meat poisoning which occurred at Welbeck and at Nottingham, and investigated by Ballard; in the Eleventh Supplement the Arlford sausage-poisoning case, due, according to Klein, to some soluble poison of bacterial origin. The Seventeenth Supplement records an outbreak of poisoning from pork pies and brawn, from which Klein obtained and cultivated bacilli which produced the same fatal symptoms in mice as were observed when the animals were fed on the pie. Trichinosis,—The fatal malady arising from the introduction of Trichina spiralis into the human body has attracted much attention. Keller has published some important facts illustrating the symptoms produced, and the mode in which this parasite causes death. He con- siders that it is a question well worthy of the attention of medical jurists, whether many cases of death from suspected irritant poisoning, in which no poisonous matter could be detected in the body, may not have been really due to trichina-disease. The Trichina (from dpi^, a hair) spiralis, a flesh-worm, is found chiefly in the course of the fibres of all the striped muscles of the trunk and limbs, most frequently on those of the front of the chest, neck, and abdomen. It has also been found in the muscular fibres of the heart and gullet. The parasites appear in the form of very small, white, ovoid bodies or capsules, perceptible to the eye as white specks in the midst of the muscular fibres, but only distinctly seen by the aid of a magnifying-glass. The trichina, or worm, is coiled up in the centre of each oval capsufe, the greater diameter of which is parallel to the muscular fibre with which it is closely incorporated. The trichina is a parasite which passes the greater portion of its existence, in the chrysalis state, in the muscular system of animals, until, by the consumption of this muscle as food, it finds in the stomach and intes- tines of another warm-blooded animal a favourable medium for its full development into an intestinal worm. According to Virchow and Zenker, the trichina not only frequently presents itself in the human organism, but this organism is very favourable to its development. The period of incubation of the chrysalis in the stomach and bowels


[175/872 b22652516_0175.jp2]

TRICHINOSIS. of man, or of warm-blooded animals, is from six to eight days ; and during this time it there thrives and propagates to an almost incredible extent. Keller states that in three or four days, the females produce a hundred or more young ones, which begin on the sixth day to leave the parent animal; and he estimates that in a few days after the ingestion of half a pound of meat, the stomach and intestinal canal of a person may contain thirty millions of these minute worms. Herbst found the muscles of two dogs which had been fed upon parts of a badger containing worms, to be loaded with these parasites. When once introduced into the stomach and intestines, the worms leave their capsules, become free, and produce young, which migrate through the walls of the intestines into the muscles: there they become encysted, and are ultimately found appropriating and destroying the muscular substance to a greater or less extent. After a long residence in the muscle, they appear to acquire calcareous cysts. The sudden liberation of a large number of these worms causes irritation and inflammation in the bowels, attended by peculiar symptoms resembhng in some respects those of chronic poisoning. It is worthy of note that trichinae are more frequently found in pork, and articles of food derived from it, than in any other kind of meat. Measly pork appears to be sometimes of a trichinous character, rhe vitality of the parasites is not destroyed unless the meat or Dther substance in which they are located has been subjected to the :emperature of boiling water, for a sufficient time to ensure that every particle has been exposed to this degree of heat. Salting, smoking, or 3artial cooking is not sufficient to destroy the worms in all parts of the !bod, and they have even been found living in putrefied meat. This may serve to account in some cases for the serious symptoms which [lave followed the use of pork as food, also of bacon, sausages, and Gl^erman sausages which are generally made of raw ham. The symptoms produced by the use of such food are, in the first stage, those of intestinal irritation, loss of appetite, sickness, pain, general weakness of the limbs, diarrhoea, swelling of the eyelids and of the joints, profuse clammy perspiration, and wasting fever. Death is 3ither the result of paralysis (from destruction of the muscular fibres) 3r of peritonitis and irritative fever. During the perforation of the 3oat of the intestines by these worms, the mucous membrane becomes irritated and inflamed: pus is formed on its surface, and bloody evacua- tions are sometimes passed. Mr. Taylor directed attention (Sept. 1862) to the serious symptoms produced by Canadian partridges eaten as food. A lady who had partaken of this food was, in about two hours and a half, attacked with the following symptoms: She had sickness and became insensible; the skin was cold and no pulse could be felt. She was in a hopeless state for some hours, and only slowly recovered. The birds were quite fresh, having been packed in ice. in another case there were similar symptoms, with constriction of the throat and great pain. Animals were made ill by this food. It was believed that, in these cases, the birds had not been kiUed by poison, but that their flesh had been


[176/872 b22652516_0176.jp2]

164 MILK. PTOMAINES. NEUROTIC POISONS. OPIUM. rendered poisonous by some vegetable which they had eaten. It is stated that in some parts of Australia the mutton is rendered poisonous by reason of the sheep feeding on poisonous plants. ('Med. Times and Gaz.' 1871, 1, 728.) Pheasants which feed upon the Kalmia shrub are poisonous when eaten as food. Milk,—Vaughan has obtained from noxious milk a substance which he terms tyrotoxicon, which appears to be a definite chemical com- pound, diazobenzene butyrate. Ptomaines.—A class of bodies, known as cadaveric alkaloids or ptomaines, has within the last few years attracted much attention. They are found during the putrefaction of animal matters, and Selmi has directed attention to their significance in toxicology. The ptomaines are probably allied to neurine, an alkaloid obtained from the brain and from bile. Physiologically, some of them act like muscarine, the active alkaloid of the fly-fungus. It is probable that some of the cases of poisoning by putrid meat are ascribable to the formation of ptomaines during decay. Ptomaines are now recognized as the poisonous pro- ducts of the growth of micro-organisms. Many of them appear to be proteids—albumins and globulins. NEUEOTIC POISONS. CHAPTER 16. opium.—symptoms.—appearances.—its action on infants.—poisoning with opiate compounds.—opium habit.—morphine and its salts.— meconic acid.—process for detecting opium in organic mixtures.—• dialysis.—chlorodyne.—cocaine. Opium, Symptoms.—The symptoms which manifest themselves when a large dose of opium or its tincture has been taken, are in general of a uniform character. A condition of pleasurable mental excitement, usually of very short duration, is experienced; but this is followed by weariness, headache, incapacity for exertion, a sense of weight in the Hmbs, diminution of sensibility, giddiness, drowsiness, a strong tendency to sleep, stupor, succeeded by perfect insensibility, the person lying motionless, with the eyes closed as if in a sound sleep. In this state he may be easily roused by a loud noise, and made to answer a question; but he speedily relapses into stupor. In a later stage, when coma has supervened with stertorous breathing, it will be difficult, if not impossible, to rouse him. The pulse is at first small, quick, and irregular, the respiration hurried, and the skin warm and bathed m perspiration; but when the person becomes comatose, the breathing is slow and stertorous, and the pulse slow and full. The skin is occasionally cold and pallid, sometimes livid. In the early stage the


[177/872 b22652516_0177.jp2]

OPIUM. SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES. 165 upils are contracted; in the last stage, and when progressing to a .tal termination, they may be found dilated. In a case referred to le author in 1846, one pupil was contracted and the other dilated. In ifants and children they are generally much contracted. They are )mmonly insensible to light. The expression of the countenance is [acid, pale, and ghastly; the eyes are heavy, and the lips are vivid, ometimes there is vomiting, or even purging; and, if vomiting takes [ace freely before stupor sets in, there is great hope of recovery, his symptom is chiefly observed when a large dose of opium has been ,ken. The peculiar odour of opium is often perceptible in the breath, ausea and vomiting, with headache, loss of appetite, and lassitude, lay follow on recovery. In cases likely to prove fatal the muscles ' the limbs feel flabby and relaxed, the lower jaw drops, the pulse is eble and imperceptible, the sphincters are in a state of relaxation, the ipils are unaffected by light, the temperature of the body is low, there a loud mucous rattle in iDreathing, and convulsions are sometimes )served before death, but more commonly in children than in adults. 1st before death the pupils may dilate. One of the marked effects of is poison is to suspend all the secretions except that of the skin, ven during the lethargic state, the skin, although cold, is often •piously bathed in perspiration. The contracted state of the pupils furnishes a valuable distinctive i-n of poisoning with opium or the, salts of morphine. In relying upon it is necessary, however, to bear in mind the fact pointed out by ^ilks, that, in apoplexy seated in the Pons Varolii, the pupils are also •ntracted. He describes two cases of this form of apoplexy which ere mistaken for poisoning with opium in consequence of this con- tion of the pupils. ('Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1863, i. p. 214.) In -rbolic-acid poisoning the pupils are much contracted, though seldom i minutely as in opium-poisoning; and there is coma and stertorous eathing. As a rule, the peculiar odour of carbolic acid in the breath ill prevent any mistake as to the nature of the case. The symptoms opium above described usually commence in from half an hour to I hour after the poison has been swallowed. Sometimes they come I in a few minutes, especially in children; and at other times their tpearance is protracted for a long period. If morphine, the active kaloid of opium, be given subcutaneously, narcotic symptoms may me on within three or four minutes. It has been frequently observed at a person has recovered from the first symptoms, and has then id a fatal relapse. There is some medico-legal interest connected ith this state, which has been called secondary asphyxia from opium, though there appears to be no good reason for giving to it this name. Appearances.—In a case that proved fatal in fifteen hours, the issels of the head were found unusually congested throughout. On e surface of the fore part of the left hemisphere of the brain there IS an ecchymosis, apparently produced by the effusion of a few drops blood. There were numerous bloody points on the cut surface of e brain; there was no serum collected in the ventricles. The 3mach was quite healthy. Fluidity of the blood is mentioned as a


[178/872 b22652516_0178.jp2]

i66 OPIUM. FATAL DOSE. common appearance in cases of poisoning by opiam. There is also engorgement of the lungs—most frequently observed, according to Christison, in those cases which have been preceded by convulsions. Among the external appearances there is often great lividity of the skin. Extravasation of blood on the brain is rarely seen ; serous effusions in the ventricles, or between the membranes, are sometimes found. The stomach is so seldom found otherwise than in a healthy state that the inflammatory redness said to have been occasionally seen may have been due to accidental causes. From this account of the appearances in the dead body, it will be perceived that there is nothing but a fulness of the vessels of the brain which can be looked upon as specially indicative of poisoning with opium; and even this is not always present. The medicinal dose of opium, in extract or powder, for a healthy adult varies from half a grain to two grains. Five grains would be a very full dose. The medicinal dose of the tincture (laudanum) is from five to forty minims for an adult. Persons have taken very large doses of the tincture, and recovered from the effects. A woman, set. 38, is said to have recovered after swallowing eight ounces. ('Lancet,' 1873, i. p. 468.) The smallest dose of solid opium which has been known to prove fatal to an adult was in the case of a man, set. 32, who died very speedily in a convulsive fit, after having taken two pills, each containing about one grain and a quarter of extract of opium. This quantity is equivalent to four grains of crude opium. (' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 37, p. 236.) The smallest fatal dose of the tincture in an adult that the author found recorded, is two drachms. (' Ed. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' July, 1840.) The editor has known less than a grain of opium in solution destroy life in an aged person. In connection with this subject it is important for a medical jurist to bear in mind that infants and young persons are liable to be killed by very small doses of opium, and appear to be peculiarly susceptible to the effects of this poison. The syrup of poppies, paregoric elixir, Godfrey's cordial, Dalby's carminative, and a variety of soothing syrups owe their nar- cotic efiects to the presence of opium. The symptoms and appearances which they produce, when taken in a large dose, are similar to those caused by opium or its tincture. One-sixtieth part of a grain of opium has thus destroyed the life of an infant. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1875, ii. p. 570.) It has been remarked that most cases of poisoning with opium prove fatal in from about six to twelve hours. Those who recover from the stupor, and survive longer than this period, generally do well; buL there may be a partial recovery, or a remission of the symptoms, and afterwards a fatal relapse. The symptoms, however, generally pro- gress steadily to a fatal termination, or the stupor suddenly disappears, vomiting ensues, and the person recovers. Several instances are recorded of this poison having destroyed life in from seven to nine hours. One occurred within the author's knowledge, in which an adult died in five hours after taking the drug prescribed for him by a quack. Christison met with a case which could not have lasted


[179/872 b22652516_0179.jp2]

OPIUM HABIT. MORPHINE. 167 above five, and another is mentioned by him which only lasted three hours. Barwis communicated to the author the case of an adult, which proved fatal in three hours and a half. This drug in all its forms is especially fatal to infants. They die rapidly from very small doses. Fatal Period.—When swallowed, opium may kill within a period of two hours; but more commonly the patient does not succumb till after the lapse of from six to eighteen hours. Opium Habit.—It must be borne in mind by the medical jurist that persons may habituate themselves to the use of enormous doses of opium and its chief alkaloid morphine (opium-eating; morphine habit). The practice of subcutaneously injecting morphine is very prevalent. Sixteen grains of morphine per diem is not a very unusual quantity to be habitually used by a person given to this degrading practice, and even forty-eight grains has been used per diem. Recently a unique case was tried in which the plea of morphine taking was successfully urged as a defence in a charge of murder by morphine. The deceased man. Dr. Lyddon, a hard drinker and morphine taker, was found in a dying condition, with an empty bottle near which had contained the pharmacopoeial solution of hydrochlorate of morphine. His brother was charged with administering the poison to him, and was acquitted. {Beg. v. Lyddon, C.C.C., March, 1891.) Morphine and its Salts.—Morphine (morphia) is the poisonous alkaloid of opium, of which it forms from five to ten per cent. The two principal salts of this alkaloid are the hydrochlorate and the acetate. Opium owes its narcotic properties chiefly to the presence of morphine in combination with meconic acid. A dose of one grain of a salt of morphine has destroyed life. One-fourth of a grain, and even one- sixth of a grain, injected beneath the skin has, in the editor's experi- ence, killed an adult. Ebertz met with a case in which an overdose of the hydrochlorate, supplied by mistake for quinine, destroyed the life of a lady in from forty to fifty minutes. Symptoms of narcotism appeared in a quarter of an hour. In one case observed by the editor, a dose of ten grains destroyed the life of a woman in from half an hour to an hour; and, when subcutaneously injected, the salts of morphine may kill in even a shorter time. (For a very full account of the appearances and analysis, see ' Vierteljahrsschr. f. Gerichtl. Med.,' 1873, l,p. 281.) In 1888, a child, set. 2 years, died narcotised twenty hours after tasting a ten per cent, solution of acetate of morphine. No symptoms were noticeable for at least three hours after the poison was taken, though the child was seen by two medical men. In the urine drawn off six hours before death, the editor detected morphine. Morphine and its salts rapidly destroy life by absorption w^hen applied to a wounded or ulcerated surface. A woman thus lost her life in 1867, by reason of an ignorant druggist applying thirty grains of morphine to an ulcerated breast. Morphine is in part excreted in the urine, but, according to the recent researches of Tauber, more especially in the faeces, even when the alkaloid is administered hypodermically. Chemical Analysis. Oiduni.—There are no means of detecting


[180/872 b22652516_0180.jp2]

MORPHINE. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. i68 opium itself, either in its solid or liquid state, except by its smell, taste, and other physical properties, or by giving a portion of the suspected substance to an animal, and observing whether any narcotic effects are produced. The smell is said to be peculiar, but a similar smell is possessed by lactucarium, which contains neither meconic acid nor morphine. The odour is a good concomitant test of the presence of the drug, whether it be in a free state or dissolved in alcohol or water, but it is not perceptible by many people when the solution is much diluted. The taste is bitter. The analysis in cases of poisoning by opium is therefore limited to the detection of morphine and meconic acid. i¥orp/iiwe.—Morphine may be identified by the following pro- perties:—1. It crystallizes in hexahedral prisms, which are white and perfect according to their degree of purity (Fig. 19). The crystals obtained by adding weak ammonia to a solution of morphine in hydrochloric acid vary in form. When slowly produced they some- times present the forms represented in the engraving (Fig. 20). 2. Fig. 19. Fig. 20. Crystals of Morphine, from alcohol, mag- Crystals of Morphine.obtained by adding nified 80 diameters. Ammonia to a solution of the hy- drochlorate, magnified 124 diameters. "When heated on platinum, the crystals melt, become dark coloured, and burn like a resin with a yellow smoky flame, leaving a carbonaceous residue. If this experiment is performed in a small tube, it will be found, by employing test-paper, that ammonia is one of the products of decomposition. 3. It is scarcely soluble in cold water, as it requires 1000 parts to dissolve it; it is soluble in 500 parts of boiling water, and the hot solution has a faint alkaline reaction. By its great in- solubility in water it is readily known from its salts. It is not very soluble in ether or chloroform, thus differing from narcotine; but it is dissolved by fifty parts of cold, and thirty parts of boiling, alcohol. It is dissolved by a solution of potash or soda, from which it cannot be easily removed by ether. It is soluble in acetic ether, and this liquid has been employed for the purpose of separating morphine from organic liquids. 4. It is easily dissolved by a very small quantity of


[181/872 b22652516_0181.jp2]

TESTS FOR MORPHINE. MECONIC ACID. 169 all diluted acids, mineral and vegetable. 5. Morphine and its solutions have a bitter taste. 6. The salts of morphine are not precipitated in a crystalline form by solutions of sulphocyanide of potassium, ferricyanide of potassium, or chromate of potassium. In this respect they are strikingly distinguished from the salts of strychnine, which give well- marked crj'stalline precipitates with these three reagents. Like all alkaloids, the morphine in solution is thrown down white by the chlor- iodide of potassium and mercury (made by dissolving six grains of corrosive sublimate and twenty-two grains of iodide of potassium in a fluid ounce of water). This liquid precipitates albumen; hence this substance, if present, should be removed by boiling the liquid before applying the test. In order to apply the test for moiphine, the alkaloid may be dis- solved in a few drops of a diluted acid, either acetic or hydrochloric. If the hydrochlorate or the acetate of morphine is presented for analysis, the salt may be at once dissolved in a small quantity of warm water. The tests for this alkaloid are the following:—1. Nitric acid. This, when added to a moderately strong solution of a salt of morphine, produces slowly a deep orange-red colour. If added to the crystals of morphine or its salts, red fumes are evolved ; the alkaloid is entirely dissolved, and the solution acquires instantly the deep-red colour above described, becoming, however, lighter on standing. In order that this effect should follow, the solution of morphine must not be too much diluted, and the acid must be strong and added in rather large quantity. The colour is rendered much lighter by boihng; therefore the test should never be added to a hot solution. 2. Iodic acid. A drop or two of solution of iodic acid should be mixed with its volume of chloroform. There should be no change of colour. On adding a small quantity of these mixed liquids to morphine or its salts, either soHd or in solution, the iodine is separated from the iodic acid and dissolved by the chloroform, which sinks to the bottom, acquiring a pink colour, varying in intensity according to the quantity of morphine present. Now make alkaline with ammonia and shake—the pink colour is discharged from the chloroform, and the supernatant watery solution acquires a deep brown colour. This reaction distinguishes morphine from all other alkaloids and from other bodies, such as the sulphocyanides (in saliva), which hberate iodine from iodic acid. The presence of morphine may be thus easily detected, in spite of the presence of organic matter, in one drop of the tincture of opium, in chlorodyne, or other opiate liquids. If chloroform is not used, iodine may be detected by starch paste, which is turned blue. 3. Sulpho- molyhdic acid. This is made by dissolving about one-eighth of a grain of powdered molybdic acid in a drachm of warm pure concentrated sulphuric acid and cooling. The liquid should be freshly prepared and kept from contact with air and organic matter. When one or two drops are rubbed with dry morphine or any of its salts, an intense reddish-purple or crimson colour is produced. This changes to a dingy green and ultimately to a splendid sapphire hue. 4. Sulphuric acid bichromate of potassium. When strong sulphuric acid is poured


[182/872 b22652516_0182.jp2]

DETECTION OF OPIUM IN ORGANIC MIXTURES. 170 on pure morphine in a solid state, there is either no eflfect, or the alkaloid acquires a hght pinkish colour. On adding to this a drop of solution of bichromate of potassium, or a small fragment of a crystal, it immediately becomes green, and retains this colour for some time. Meconic Acid.—This is an acid, commonly seen in scaly white crystals. It is combined with morphine in opium, of which it forms on an average six per cent., and it serves to render this alkaloid soluble in water and other menstrua. Tests.—Many tests have been proposed for meconic acid; but there is only one upon which any reliance can be placed, namely ferric chloride. This test produces, even in a diluted solution of meconic acid, a deep-red colour ; and it is owing to the presence of this acid that a salt of iron strikes a red colour in tincture and infusion of opium, as well as in all liquids containing traces of meconate of morphine. The red colour of the ferric meconate is not easily destroyed by diluted mineral acids, by a solution of corrosive sublimate, or by terchloride of gold, but it is by sulphurous acid and stannous chloride. In liquids containing tannin, e.g. tea or beer, the action of this test is obscured; but a small quantity of dilute sulphuric acid will remove the tannate of iron and bring out the red colour of the meconate. Detection of Opium in organic mixtures.—Opium itself may be regarded as an organic solid, containing the poisonous salt which we wish to extract. It is not always that, in fatal cases of poisoning by opium or its tincture, even when these are taken in large quantity and death is speedy, we can succeed in detecting meconate of morphine in the stomach. The poison is probably removed by vomiting or absorp- tion. Although this absence of the poison from the stomach is now a well-known fact, there is a popular prejudice that, unless found, there is a failure of proof that the death was caused by opium. In the cases of young children who are killed by a very small quantity of this drug, it is the exception to the rule to find any clear evidence of opium, but more common to find morphine in minute quantity. Its detection must in all cases depend on the quantity taken, the rate of absorption, and the time during which the person survived. At the trial of Chantrelle (High Court of Just., Edin,, May, 1878), no trace of opium was found in the body, but there was distinct evidence of the presence of morphine and meconic acid, in certain stains on the sheets of the bed on which deceased was lying. Although made a strong point for the defence, the absence of opium from the stomach was really an unimportant item in the case. The evidence tended to show that the poison had been administered in the form of fluid extract —a form most favourable to absorption; that the quantity administered was small; that the deceased survived fifteen or sixteen hours, and that she had vomited during this time. These conditions are all consistent with the rapid removal of opium from the stomach. The evidence which was here wanting was fully supplemented by the detection of morphine and meconic aid in the stains on the sheets. The prisoner was convicted, and executed, in spite of the strenuous efibrts made to invalidate the medical evidence.


[183/872 b22652516_0183.jp2]

DETECTION OF OPIUM IN ORGANIC MIXTURES. 171 If the matter is solid, it should be cut into small slices; if liquid, evaporated to an extract; and, in either case, digested with a large quantity of rectified spirit slightly acidulated with acetic acid. The residue should be well pressed in muslin; the alcoholic liquid should then be evaporated at a gentle temperature until it is almost dry. The residue should be digested in water, filtered, and treated with acetate of lead, until there is no further precipitation. This liquid should be warmed and filtered; meconate of lead is left on the filter, while any morphine passes through under the form of acetate. The surplus acetate of lead, dissolved in the filtered liquid (containing the morphine), should now be precipitated by a current of sulphuretted hydrogen gas—the black sul- phide of lead separated by filtration, and the filtered liquid evaporated at a very moderate temperature to an extract, so that any sulphuretted hydrogen may be entirely expelled. On treating this extract with alcohol, the acetate of morphine, if present in sufficient quantity, may be dissolved out and tested. If the alcohoHc liquid is still much coloured, it may be again evaporated and taken up by water. Animal charcoal deprives it of colour, but at the same time it removes the morphine if this is in small quantity. If there is a sufficient quantity of pure acetate present, the addition of a drop of solution of ammonia to a portion of the liquid on a slide, will produce crystals of the form of slender prisms. The remainder may be tested by nitric and iodic as well as by sulphomolybdic acid. The prismatic crystals obtained under these circumstances have nothing peculiar or definite in form. At the Chantrelle trial (p. 170) it was stated by an analyst that the crystals furnished better evidence of the presence of morphine than the colour- reactions. This statement is against all experience and authority. Admitting that prismatic crystals of morphine could be obtained from a few slight stains of opium on a sheet, no medical jurist would rely upon the form of these crystals as evidence of the presence of morphine until after he had tested them by one or more of the acids above mentioned. This frivolous objection to the chemical evidence was exposed and set aside in the cross-examination of the witness. (See 'Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1878, i. p. 565.) A better plan is to treat the liquid by the modified plan of Stas {vide Strychnine, post)^ taking care to avoid a high temperature and the presence of free mineral acids ; and then to extract with a mixture of equal volumes of acetic ether and ordinary ether, in which mixture morphine is freely soluble, though it is almost insoluble in ordinary ether. The alkaloidal residue obtained by evaporating the ethereal liquid may be tested, as above, for the presence of morphine. The meconate of lead left on the filter and dried is readily decom- posed by boiling it with a small quantity of diluted sulphuric acid; and in the filtered liquid, neutralized if necessary by an alkali, the meconic acid is easily detected by the iron-test. The detection of meconic acid is most important, for this has been found in no substance but opium. Morphine may be obtained in an impure state as a precipi- tate by adding ammonia to a concentrated solution of the opiate extract. It may be then purified by alcohol and tested.


[184/872 b22652516_0184.jp2]

T72 POISONING WITH CHLORODYNE. COCAINE. Trial tests for both the alkaloid and acid should be first applied to the organic hquid, which may for this purpose be submitted to dialysis (see p. 74). The smell of opium may be entirely absent. Meconic acid may be detected by the action of a ferric salt on the organic liquid diluted; and morphine may be found by adding to a portion of this liquid, a mixture of iodic acid and chloroform (see p. 169). The chief difficulty in the detection of meconic acid and morphine is that the alkaloid forms only one-tenth part of opium, is easily decom- posed, and the quantity of opium present in an organic liquid is generally very small. Chlorodyne. A lady, set. 23, had been accustomed to take the liquid for the relief of pain, in doses of as much as sixty drops. She was found dead in bed, and the cause of death was referred by her medical attendant to her having taken two doses without letting a sufficient interval elapse between them. ('Lancet,' 1871, ii. p. 697.) According to E. Smith, chlorodjme is thus constituted : chloroform four drachms, hydrochlorate of morphine twenty grains, ether two drachms, oil of peppermint eight minims, prussic acid six drachms, mixture of gum acacia one ounce, treacle four ounces. (' Lancet,' 1870, i. p. 72.) There is reason to believe that this compound is not uniform in composition. According to another formula, the tinctures of lobelia and capsicum, and extract of liquorice, are introduced. Prussic acid may be detected in it by the action of the vapour on nitrate of silver. Crystals of cyanide of silver are obtained after some time. Morphine may be detected in it by shaking a portion with a mixture of iodic acid and chloroform (see p. 169). Cocaine. This potent alkaloid, now so largely used in medicine as an analgesic (pain-killer), has on many occasions caused alarming symptoms, and in some cases death. Even one-sixth of a grain, h^-podermically injected, may cause toxic sjTuptoms. These are nausea, vomiting, headache, giddiness, loss of vision, profuse perspiration, lividity, cramps in the region of the stomach, a quick irregular feeble pulse, shallow gasping respiration, convulsions, paralysis, and in some cases delirium {vide ' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1888, i. p. 151). A man, set. 40, injected beneath his skin half a grain of the alkaloid to remedy the after-eflfects of drunkenness. Twenty minutes later, he was found lying on a doorstep, pale, with diluted pupils, and the conjunctiva of the eye insensitive. The breathing was slow and difficult, the pulse 140 in the minute. He was sensible, unable to articulate, and could not swallow, liquids being rejected from the mouth. The patient was in a serious state for some time, but recovered. This man had previously had repeated doses of five and six-tenths of a grain administered by injection every half-hour till three grains had been used, without ill effects. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1887, i. p. 524.) In other cases alarming symptoms of depression have been produced by the apphcation of solutions of cocaine to mucous membranes, and when injected before surgical and dental operations. ('Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1887, i. p. 676; 1888, i. p. 151.) Generally the


[185/872 b22652516_0185.jp2]

QUmiNE. ANTIPYRETICS. PRUSSIC ACID. symptoms were nausea and vomiting; headache, loss of vision, and deafness ; loss of taste and smell; lividity and profuse perspiration; a rapid, irregular, intermittent pulse ; shallow, irregular, gasping, convul- sive breathing; impairment of gait and speech ; muscular rigidity ; convulsive twitchings, and paralysis. The habit of injecting cocaine is now common. QumiNE. That quinine acts as a poison in excessive doses is a well-ascertained fact. The symptoms are noises in the ears, deafness, and excessive cardiac weakness, ending in death {vide Husemann, in 'Therap. Monats.,' 1887). Antipyretics. During the last decade a large number of antipyretics (substances which lower the temperature of the body) have been introduced into medical practice, some of them as hypnotics ; and most of them are capable of acting as poisons. They can here be only briefly referred to. Within the editor's experience one of the safest of them, sulphonal, produced alarming and prolonged coma in a dypsomaniac. CHAPTER 17. prussic acid.—symptoms and appearances.—tests for the acid.— process for organic mixtures.—cyanide of potassium.—essential oil of bitter almonds.—nitrobenzene.—nitroglycerine. Hydrocyanic or Prussic Acid. Symptoms.—The solutions of this acid have a hot bitter taste and an odour resembling that of bitter almonds. The time at which the symptoms of poisoning commence varies, but it is generally very shortly after the poison has been swallowed. When a large dose has been taken, as from half an ounce to an ounce of the diluted acids (two to four per cent.), the symptoms usually commence in the act of swallow- ing, or within a few seconds. It is stated that a diluted is more rapidly absorbed than a stronger acid. It is rare that the appearance of symptoms is delayed beyond one or two minutes. When the patient has been seen at this period, he has been quite insensible, the eyes fixed and glistening, the pupils dilated and unaffected by light, the limbs flaccid, the skin cold and covered with a clammy perspiration; there is convulsive breathing at long intervals, and the patient appears dead in the intermediate period; the pulse is imperceptible, and involuntary evacuations are occasionally passed. The respiration is slow, deep, gasping, occasionally heaving or sobbing, and is generally convulsive; but when the coma or insensibility is profound, it may be stertorous. This was observed in a case which occurred to Christison. (' Edin. Month. Jour.,' Feb. 1850, p. 97.) Convulsions of the limbs and body,


[186/872 b22652516_0186.jp2]

PRUSSIC ACID. SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES. 174 with a spasmodic closure of the jaw, are sometimes noticed among the symptoms. The following cases present fair examples of the immediate effects of this poison in a large and fatal dose. A medical man swallowed seven drachms of the common prussic acid. He survived about four or five minutes. About two minutes after he had taken the poison, he was found lying on the floor senseless ; there were no convulsions of the limbs or trunk, but a faint flickering motion was observed about the muscles of the lips. The breathing appeared to cease entirely for some seconds; it was then performed in convulsive fits, and the act of expiration was remarkably deep, and lasted for an unusual time. When the dose is large the breath commonly exhales a strong odour of the acid, and this is also perceptible in the room. A medical student took a drachm and a half of Scheele's prussic acid (strength about four per cent.). He was heard to call out once or twice, and a gentleman sleeping in the next room ran to his assistance. He was heard to fall from the sofa to the floor, and when picked up was * found to be already insensible. Hilton Fagge saw him a httle later—• fifteen to thirty minutes after the poison was taken. He was then lying on a sofa, quite insensible. The limbs were paralyzed, and lay in any position in which they were placed ; and they were free from all rigidity. The jaws were clenched. The pupils were normal. There were no convulsions, nor had there been any. The face was not livid. The pulse was very rapid, the respirations very infrequent. Cold water dashed on the face produced at each application deep respiratory efforts. An attempt to administer an emetic failed, in consequence of inability to swaflow. Strong ammonia applied to the nostrils failed to produce the slightest stimulation. After a time the breathing became slower— seven respirations in a minute—and it was distinctly stertorous. The pulse became slower and markedly feebler ; and now cold effusion failed to produce any effect. The respirations fell to four in a minute, the face became blue, and the pulse imperceptible at the wrist. Breathing ceased in from an hour to an hour and a half after the poison was swallowed. There was a marked odour of prussic acid in the room; but it was not noticed at first whether the breath smelt of the acid. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1869, p. 259.) Appearances.—The body when seen soon after death often exhales the odour of prussic acid; but if it has remained exposed before it is seen, and if it has been exposed to the open air or in a shower of rain, the odour may not be perceptible; again, the odour may be concealed by tobacco-smoke, peppermint, copaiba, or other powerful odours. Externally, the skin is commonly hvid, or is tinged of a violet colour ; the nails are blue, the fingers clenched, and the toes contracted; the jaws firmly closed, with foam or froth about the mouth, the face often pale, but sometimes bloated and swollen, and the eyes have been - observed to be wide open, fixed, glassy, very prominent and glistening, with the pupils dilated; but a similar condition of the eyes has been observed in other kinds of violent death. Internally, the venous system is gorged with dark-coloured liquid blood; the stomach and intestines


[187/872 b22652516_0187.jp2]

FATAL DOSE. A^^•ALYSIS. may be in their natural state ; but in several instances they have been found more or less congested. The mucous membrane of the stomach may be intensely reddened throughout. The smallest dose of this acid which is reported to have caused death was in the case of a healthy adult woman, who died in twenty minutes from a dose equivalent to nine-tenths of a grain of anhydrous prussic acid. (' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 35, p. 896.) This corresponds to about forty- five minims of the B. P. acid. In a case reported by T. Taylor (' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 36, p. 104), a stout healthy man swallowed this dose, i.e. nine-tenths of a grain, by mistake, and remained insensible for four hours, when he vomited and began to recover. From the facts hitherto observed, we shall not be wrong in assuming that a quantity of B. P. acid (at two per cent.) above fifty minims {i.e. one grain of anhydrous acid), or an equivalent proportion of any other acid, would commonly suffice to destroy the life of an adult. This is the nearest approach that we can make to the smallest fatal dose. When a dose of half an ounce and upwards of the B. P. acid has been taken, we may probably take the average period for death at from two to ten minutes. In Hick's case, twenty grains of Scheele's acid (con- taining five per cent.) destroyed life in twenty minutes. It is only when a dose is just in a fatal proportion, that we find a person to survive from half an hour to an hour. In this respect, death by prussic acid is hke death by lightning—the person in general either dies speedily or he recovers altogether. Before the access of insensibility the person often possesses a wonderful power of exertion and locomo- tion, perhaps in a state of half-consciousness. Thus he may be able to cork and conceal the bottle from which he has swallowed the poison; or he may run several yards before falling. Due allowance must be made for the performance of these voluntary acts. (See ' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1877, i. p. 11.) Chemical Analysis.—Two solutions of prussic acid are met with in British commerce—the British pharmacopoeial acid (' B. P.' acid), con- taining two per cent, of the acid, and the so-called Scheele's acid, a stronger preparation containing about four per cent. These solutions are limpid like water, possess a faint acid reaction, and the vapour has a peculiar odour, which, when the acid is concentrated, although not at first perceptible, is sufficient to produce giddiness, insensibihty, and other alarming symptoms. The tests which are best adapted for the detection of this poison, either in liquid or vapour, are equally appli- cable whether the acid is concentrated or diluted, and, so far as the detection of the va^pour is concerned, whether the acid is pure or mixed with other liquids. In the simple state, the tests are three in number— —the Silver, the Iron, and the Sulphur tests. 1. The Silver-Test. Nitrate of Silver.—This, added in excess, yields with prussic acid a dense white precipitate, speedily subsiding in heavy clots to the bottom of the vessel, and leaving the liquid almost clear. The precipitate is identified as cj'-anide of silver by the following properties:—a. It is insoluble in cold nitric acid; but when drained of water, and a sufficient quantity of the strong acid is added, it is easily dissolved on boiUng.


[188/872 b22652516_0188.jp2]

176 TESTS FOR PEUSSIC ACID. Fig. 21. h. It evolves prussic acid when digested in hydrochloric acid, c. The precipitate, when well dried^ and heated in a small reduction-tube, yields cyanogen, which may be burnt as it issues, producing a rose-red flame with a blue halo. This is a well-marked character, and at once identifies the acid which yielded the precipitate as prussic acid. Five grains by weight of the dry precipitate correspond to one grain of anhydi'ous prussic acid, to twenty-five grains of Scheele's acid, and fifty grains of the British pharmacopceial acid. For the detection of prussic acid in vapour, hold over the liquid a watch-glass moistened in the centre with a drop of a solution of nitrate of silver. Cyanide of silver, indicated by the formation of an opaque white film in the solution, is immediately produced, if the acid is only in a moderate state of concentration. One drop of a diluted acid con- taining less than l-50th of a grain of the anhydrous acid produces speedily a visible efi'ect. When the prussic acid is more diluted, a few minutes are required; and the opaque film begins to show itself at the edges of the silver solution. In this case the action maybe accelerated by the heat of the hand applied to the vessel. If the vapour is allowed to reach the nitrate of silver gradually and much diluted with air, then instead of an opaque film of cyanide of silver, crystals well defined under the microscope will be slowly produced, and these will constitute an additional proof of the presence of the acid in a state of vapour. As shown in the illustration (Fig. 21), these crystals have the form of slender prisms with oblique terminations. They often hang together in groups, and generally require a high magnifying power to render them visible. 2. The Iron-Test—The object of the application of this test is the pro- duction of Prussian Uue. Add to a small quantity of the suspected poison- ous liquid, a few drops of a solution of ferrous sulphate and a little solution of potash. A dirty-green or brownish precipitate falls; on shaking this with air for a few minutes, and then adding diluted hydrochloric or sulphuric acid, the liquid becomes blue; and Prussian blue, of its well-known colour, unafiected by diluted acids, slowly subsides. 3. The Sulphur-Test. A small quantity of yellow sulphide of ammo- nium is added to a few drops of a solution of prussic acid, and the mixture is gently warmed ; it becomes colourless, and, on evaporation, leaves crystals of sulphocyanide of ammonium—the sulphocyanide being indicated by the intense blood-red colour produced on adding to the dry residue a solution of nearly neutral persalt of iron; this red colour immediately disappears on adding a few drops of a solution of corrosive sublimate. Crystals of Cyanide of Silver from the vapour of prussic acid, magnified 124 diameters.


[189/872 b22652516_0189.jp2]

PRUSSIC ACID IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS AND TISSUES. 177 The great utility of the sulphur-test, however, is in its appHcation to the detection of the minutest portion of prussic acid when in a state of vapour. In this respect it surpasses in deHcacy any other process yet discovered. In order to apply it, we place the diluted prussic acid in a watch-glass, and invert over it another watch-glass having in its centre one drop of yellow sulphide of ammonium. No change apparently takes place in the sulphide;. but if the upper watch-glass is removed after the lapse of from half a minute to ten minutes, according to the quantity and strength of the prussic acid present, crystallized sulphocyanide of ammonium will be obtained on gently evaporating the drop of liquid to dryness. With an acid of from three to five per cent, the action is completed in ten seconds. The addition of one drop of neutral ferric sulphate or chloride (free from nitric acid) to the dried residue brings out the blood-red colour instantly, which is intense in proportion to the quantity of sulphocyanide present. (For some remarks on the appli- cation of this process to the detection of prussic acid, see ' Med. Gaz.,' 1847, vol. 39, p. 765.) Prussic Acid in organic liquids. Detection hy vapour without distillation.—The organic liquid may be placed in a short wide- mouthed bottle, to which a watch-glass has been previously fitted as a cover. The capacity of the bottle may be such as to allow the sur- face of the liquid to be within one or two inches of the concave surface of the watch-glass. The solution of Nitrate of silver is then used as a trial-test for the vapour in the manner above described. If the 1-200th of a grain of prussic acid is present, and not too largely diluted, it will be detected (at a temperature of 60° F.) by the drop of nitrate of silver being converted' into an opaque white or crystalline film of cyanide of silver, the chemical change commencing at the margin. We may then substitute yellow sulphide of ammonium for the nitrate of silver, and proceed in the manner above described. In cold weather it may be necessary to place the bottle in a basin of warm water. If the solution of silver is tarnished by sulphuretted hydrogen, as a result of putrefaction, the sulphur-test alone should be used. By this process prussic acid has been detected in the stomach as late as twelve days after death of ^ a person poisoned by it. After the stomach has been exposed for a few days longer, the acid has entirely disappeared. If traces of the poison are thus found, then the organic liquid should be acidulated and distilled in a water-bath, and about one-fourth of the contents of the flask collected in a receiver kept cool by water. (For the form of apparatus, see p. 109, ante.) The tests may now be applied to the distilled liquid, which will have the odour of prussic acid. In the tissues.—Soon after death the poison may be easily detected in the blood, secretions, or any of the soft organs, by placing them in a bottle, and collecting the vapour in the manner already described. This will be found more convenient and satisfactory than the process by distillation. The poison has been thus discovered, in experiments on animals, in the blood, and even in the exhalation from the chest. If the body is in a putrefied state^ the residuary prussic acid may N


[190/872 b22652516_0190.jp2]

178 CYANIDE OF POTASSIUM. have been converted into fixed sulphoeyanide of ammonium. In order to detect this salt in the stomach or its contents, we should digest the parts finely cut up in hot alcohol, filter the alcohoHc hquid, evaporate to dryness, and take up any crystalline residue with water. A solution of a persalt of iron added to this solution, will indicate the presence of a sulphoeyanide by imparting to it an intensely red colour. The editor has detected prussic acid as a sulphoeyanide in the blood many weeks after the death of a person who died from prussic acid-poisoning. Cyanide of Potassium. Symptoms.—This salt has a bitter taste, producing first a sense of coldness on the tongue, followed by a feeling of constriction, and burning heat in the throat. It is one of the most formidable poisons known to chemists. It has destroyed life in a quarter of an hour. A dose of five grains has proved fatal in three instances. In one case the person died in two hours. (' Chem. News,"" Sept. 5, 1863.) The symptoms which the cyanide produces are similar to those occasioned by prussic acid—insensibility, spasmodic respiration, convulsions, with tetanic stiffness of the jaws and body. They appear in a few seconds or minutes, and run through their course with great rapidity. Appearances.—In a case in which an inspection of the body was made two days after death, there was no remarkable odour: the muscles were rigid; the face and fore part of the trunk pale; the back livid, except those portions which had sustained pressure. The fingers and toes were convulsively bent inwards, the nails blue, the eyelids half closed, the lips pale, the vessels of the brain filled with blueish-red blood. On making a section of the brain and spinal marrow, numerous bloody points were observed. The lungs were congested posteriorly, and, on cutting into them, a strong odour of bitter almonds was perceived. A yellowish mucus was found in the stomach, which yielded on analysis cyanide of potassium. The mucous membrane was reddened near the intestinal end. The poison was not detected in any part of the body except the contents of the stomach and intestines. (Casper's ' Wochenschrift,' Oct. 4, 1845, 657.) The stomach is some- times intensely reddened. Cyanide of potassium has a local chemical action upon the skin; and if this is abraded or wounded, it may be absorbed and produce serious effects. Some accidents of this kind have occurred in the practice of photography. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1863, vol. i. p. 454.) Analysis.—This substance is usually seen in hard white masses. It is deliquescent, and very soluble in water; the solution, when pure, is colourless, and has a strong alkahne reaction, a soapy feel, and a powerful odour of prussic acid. It is not very soluble in cold alcohol. 1. It is decomposed by all acids, and prussic acid is set free. 2. The potassium is precipitated by tartaric acid and by platinic chloride. 3. It gives a white precipitate with nitrate of sUver, which will be found to possess all the properties of cyanide of silver {ante, p. 175). This precipitate is easily redissolved by a slight excess of a solution


[191/872 b22652516_0191.jp2]

179 ESSENTIAL OIL OF BITTER ALMONDS. of cyanide of potassium. 4. If a solution of ferrous sulphate is added to a solution of the cyanide of potassium, and after agitation the mixture is treated with diluted sulphuric acid, Prussian blue will be produced. Essential Oil of Bittee Almonds. This liquid, which is used for the purpose of giving flavour and odour to confectionery, owes its poisonous properties in the crude state to the presence of prussic acid. It contains a variable quantity of this poison, which has been found in it in a proportion of from eight to twelve per cent. Almond flavour or essence of peach-kernels contains one drachm of the essential oil to seven drachms of rectified spirit. The bitter almond itself operates as a poison. A boy who had eaten several almonds was found unconscious, cyanotic, and pale, with eyehds closed and.pupils moderately dilated. The arms were stiffened with tonic spasm, and the pulse trembling. Vomiting was excited by emetics. He went to sleep, and recovered in eighteen hours. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1878, i. p. 37.) Peach-kernels operate in a similar manner. One ounce of the kernels is considered to be equal to one grain of prussic acid—a fatal dose. Symptoms.—The following may be taken as a summary: insensi- bihty ; lividity of the face ; eyes glassy, prominent, fixed, and staring ; pupils dilated and insensible to light; jaws spasmodically closed; frothy mucus about the mouth, and in some cases vomiting; coldness of the skin; heaving intermittent respiration, in some instances ster- torous; absence of the pulse; the head, and sometimes the trunk, spasmodically drawn backwards; general relaxation of the limbs; an odour of bitter almonds about the mouth. Appearances.—In one fatal case, no odour of almonds was percep- tible, nine hours after death, in the chest, head, or heart, nor in the blood. The lungs and heart were healthy. The vessels of the brain were congested, and there was a general effusion of seruni on the hemi- spheres. The lining membrane of the stomach was much congested. On opening it, the odour of bitter almonds was quite perceptible. (^Prov. Med. Jour.,' Sept. 11,1844, p. 364.) The blood with which the venous system is gorged is generally liquid, and of a dark colour. Analysis.—The essential oil, which is sometimes called peach-nut oil, is colourless when pure, but it commonly has a pale yellow colour, and a strong odour of bitter almonds, by which it may be at once identified. It has a hot burning taste, and a feeble acid reaction. The smell and taste are generally sufficient for its identification; but nitrobenzene possesses a similar odour, and has been mistaken for it. It produces, when dropped on paper, a greasy stain, which does not entirely disappear by the application of heat. It has a sp. gr. of 1*043; hence it sinks in water, which dissolves about one-thirtieth part of its weight of it. It is soluble in alcohol and in ether in all proportions. When mixed with a few drops of strong sulphuric acid, it forms a rich crimson-red liquid, which, if exposed to the air, acquires


[192/872 b22652516_0192.jp2]

l8o NITROBENZENE. SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES. a yellow colour. Prussic acid may be detected in it by dissolving the oil in alcohol, and adding solutions of ferrous sulphate and of potash. On the subsequent addition of diluted hydrochloric acid, Prussian blue is formed. NiTEOBENZEffE. Nitrobenzene, Nitrohenzol, or Essence of Mirhane, is a liquid which is largely employed as a substitute for the essential oil of bitter almonds in perfumery and confectionery, and is a formidable poison. It has been mistaken for essential oil of bitter almonds, but its mode of operation is different. In 1859, Casper published an account of this liquid under the name of ' A New Poison.' (' Vierteljahrsschr. f. Gerichhtl. Med.,' B. 16, p. 1.) It is also largely employed in the manufacture of aniline colours. Symptoms.—The cases which have yet occurred show that this is an insidious poison, both in the form of liquid and vapour. It produces a burning taste in the mouth, followed by a sensation of numbness and tingling in the tongue and lips. There is no immediate insensibility, as in poisoning by prussic acid. The eyes are bright and glassy, the features pale and ghastly, the lips and nails purple, as if stained by blackberries, the skin clammy and the pulse feeble. There is a power- ful odour resembling that of oil of bitter almonds. The mind may be clear for an hour, or for several hours, after the poison has been swallowed. The patient then becomes suddenly unconscious—the jaws fixed—the hands clenched and blue, and the muscles rigid and convulsed. In one case there was vomiting of a liquid having the odour of nitrobenzene. The breathing was slow and the pulse scarcely perceptible. Reaction set in, in about eleven hours, and recovery took place. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1864, p. 192.) In a fatal case examined by Letheby, the appearances were as follows : the superficial vessels were much gorged with blood, which was black and fluid. The lungs were congested, the cavities of the heart were full of blood, the liver was of a purple colour, the brain and its membranes were congested, and there was much bloody serosity in the ventricles. Lehmann reported the symptoms and appearances in a fatal case. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1873, 1, p. 444.) In 1876, a man, set. 21, was prescribed three-minim doses of' benzol rect.' three times a day. By mistake, the dispenser read the prescription as ordering 'benzol nit.,' and gave nitrobenzene. The first day he took these doses the patient was observed to look a little pale and weak, but he was not conscious of feeling ill till after taking the seventh dose at 9 a.m. next day. The aggregate amount of nitrobenzene now taken was ascertained to be twenty-three minims. At 2 p.m., five hours after taking this final dose, after walking not more than forty yards in the street from his office, he fell down. He was just able to give his address, and then became insensiblcw At 3.15 p.m., when seen by Gross, he was cold, and the surface of the body was bluish purple. There was no pulse, but by the stethoscope the heart could just be heard faintly beating. The lower jaw was rigidly closed; but the limbs were flaccid and


[193/872 b22652516_0193.jp2]

NITROGLYCERINE. SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES. l8l dropped powerless when raised; the pupils were widely dilated. No breathing could be perceived for twenty minutes after this. He was treated as for prussic acid-poisoning, it being thought that the poison was oil of bitter almonds. At 7 p.m. he became conscious and com- plained of headache. At 9 p.m. the skin was still blue. Next day he was fairly convalescent. From the urine collected on the morning following the accident, the editor extracted a substance having the odour of nitrobenzene. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1876, p. 371.) This compound has a narcotic action, but it differs from the ordinary narcotics in its powerful and persistent odour, which would render it difficult for a person to administer it unknowingly to another, either in hquid or vapour; in the production of profound coma at an uncer- tain interval after the stupor; and in the rapidly fatal effects when coma has followed. It operates powerfully as a poison in vapour, as well as in a liquid state. The rapidly fatal cases only would be hkely to be mistaken for apoplexy, but in these the poison would be detected by its odour. Analysis.—Nitrobenzene, or Essence of Mirbane, is a pale lemon- coloured liquid of a strong odour resembling that of bitter almonds. It has a pungent, hot, disagreeable taste. It gives to confectionery and to soap the smell of oil of bitter almonds, and gives a greasy stain to paper. It sinks in water, and is partly dissolved, imparting to it a yellowish colour. It is soluble in alcohol, ether, and chloroform; but, when agitated with water, it is in great part separated from its ethereal and chloroformic solutions. It burns with a yellow smoky flame. It yields no Prussian blue when mixed with ferrous sulphate, alcohol, and potash, and then acidulated. It is distinguished from all other liquids, excepting the essential oil of almonds, by its odour, and from this oil by the following test:—pour a few drops of each on a small plate, and add a drop of strong sulphuric acid. The oil of almonds acquires a rich crimson colour with a yellow border; the nitrobenzene produces no colour. In order to separate it from organic liquids, they may be acidulated with sulphuric acid, and submitted to distillation. It may be converted into aniline by reduction with zinc and hydro- chloric acid, and submitted to further tests. Nitroglycerine (Glonoin). This is a sweet, oily, powerfully explosive liqui(3, well known to chemists as a substitution-compound of the innoxious liquid, glycerine. It is much used in mining, under the name of ' blasting oil,' and has a sweet, aromatic, pungent taste. Mixed with an infusorial earth, it is known as dynamite. The medicinal dose is one or two hundredths of a grain. Symptoms and Appearances.—Field states that he found one drop of the liquid dissolved in water produced insensibility and other symptoms of narcotic poisoning (' Chem. News,' Nov. 7, 1863); and that one-fiftieth of a minim produced in three minutes loud noises in the head, and other distressing symptoms. Murrell has found that one


[194/872 b22652516_0194.jp2]

l82 ALCOHOL. or two minims of a one-per-cent. solution of nitroglycerine produce painful pulsation over the whole head; the pulsation soon affects the whole body, and is so marked that a pen held in the hand becomes visibly jerked. In five minutes these symptoms are followed by intense headache, languor, and depression. Nitroglycerine is now employed in medicine in lieu of nitrite of amyl, which it greatly resembles in its effects, except that these are more lasting. The editor has seen the most distressing results ensue from an overdose, the headache being of an alarming and fearful character. Nitroglycerine has in several instances been the cause of accidental death. It is sweet, colourless, and apparently innocent in appearance ; and these properties render it liable to be taken in mistake for other liquids of a less potent character. In 1864, a girl, set. 13, died after drinking some of it from a flask. A man drank a considerable quantity of the liquid in mistake for beer. An hour later he was blue in the face and insensible. When admitted into hospital he was delirious and unconscious, and speedily became comatose. The hands were frequently raised to the head, as if there was headache. The face was red and swollen. He died six hours after swallowing the poison. The brain and its membranes were congested; and there was some yellow serous fluid in the ventricles. The lungs were oedematous, the wind- pipe, stomach, and kidneys reddened. Signs of irritation were also noted in the small intestines. There were numerous small ecchymosed spots on the fundus and larger end of the stomach. In a third case, a man drank some glonoin in mistake for brandy, and died in three hours. In a fourth case a man recovered after swallowing a consider- able quantity of the poison. (Schmidt's ' Jahresber.,' 136, p. 164.) Analysis.—Nitroglycerine is a heavy, oily looking liquid. It dis- solves in water, but is insoluble in alcohol and ether. It explodes violently when struck or subjected to concussion. Nitrogl3'^cerine yields a red colour when treated with aniline and strong sulphuric acid; and also a red colour when treated with brucine and strong sulphuric acid (free from nitric acid). CHAPTER 18. ALCOHOL.—ETHER.—CHLOROFORM.—IODOFORM.—HYDRATE OF CHLORAL.— CAMPHOR. Alcohol. Symptoms.—In general the symptoms produced in poisoning with alcohol come on in the course of a few minutes. There is confusion of thought, ynih. inability to stand or walk, a tottering gait and giddi- ness, followed by stupor and coma. Should the person recover from this stage, vomiting supervenes. The insensibility produced by alcohol may not come on until after some time, and then suddenly. Christison met with an instance in which a person fell suddenly into a deep stupor


[195/872 b22652516_0195.jp2]

SYMPTOMS. 183 some tirne after he Had swallowed sixteen ounces of whisky; there were none of the usual premonitory symptoms. In another instance, a person may apparently recover from the first effects, then suddenly become insensible, and die convulsed. There is a ghastly or vacant expression on the features, which are sometimes suffused and bloated; the lips are livid, and the pupils are dilated and fixed, and if they possess the power of contracting under the influence of light, it is a favourable sign. The conjunctivae of the eyes are generally much suffused. The breath has an alcoholic odour. The more concentrated the alcohol, the more rapidly are the symptoms induced, and they are also more severe in their character. Diluted alcohol commonly pro- duces a stage of excitement before stupor, while in the action of con- centrated alcohol there may be profound coma in a few minutes. The cause of death may be generally traced to congestion of the brain or lungs, or both. Sometimes a large dose may be taken without causing death. A child, set. 4, swallowed between two and three ounces of brandy. He was found insensible, the breathing was scarcely per- ceptible, and the pupils were widely dilated. Under treatment he recovered in two days. (' Lancet,' 1872, ii. p. 66.) The symptoms arising from apoplexy, from concussion of the brain, the effects of opium, and those of carbolic acid, have been sometimes mistaken for those of poisoning by alcohol, and persons have been wrongly charged with being drunk. With respect to concussion^ a difficulty can arise only in reference to the more advanced stage of poisoning with alcohol, i.e. in which there is profound coma. Intoxica- tion may in general be easily distinguished by the odour of the breath, for so long as the symptoms continue, alcohol is ehminated by the lungs. If there should be no perceptible odour of any alcoholic liquid, the presumption is that the symptoms are not due to intoxication. When the alcoholic odour is perceptible, the symptoms may still be combined with the effects of apoplexy or concussion—a fact which can be cleared up only by a history of the case, or a careful examination of the head for marks of violence. In poisoning with opium there will be a strong smell of this drug in the breath, the symptoms come on much more gradually, and are marked by drowsiness and stupor, passing into complete lethargy, with general relaxation of the muscles, and inability to walk. In poisoning with alcohol there is either great excitement some time before the stupor, which comes on suddenly, or the person is found in a state of deep coma a few minutes after having taken the poison. In poisoning with opium the face is pale, and the pupils are contracted; in poisoning with alcohol the face, under excitement, is more commonly flushed, and the pupils are generally dilated. Another fact to be noticed is that, while perfect remissions are rare in poisoning with opium, in poisoning with alcohol a person frequently recovers his senses, and dies subsequently. When coma has supervened, the patient may be aroused by a loud noise or a violent shock in either case, and it is very difficult under these circumstances to draw a well- marked distinction. The odour of the breath, or an examination of the fluid drawn from the stomach by the pump, may then show which


[196/872 b22652516_0196.jp2]

184 ALCOHOL. APPEARANCES AND ANALYSIS. poison has been taken; but the treatment is the same in both cases. In poisoning with carboHc acid there is the characteristic odour of the acid in the breath, a white furred or shrivelled tongue, and white or brown stains about the angles of the mouth. Alcohol may act as a poison by its vapour. If the concentrated vapour be respired, it will produce the usual effects of intoxication. There is a case on record in which a child two years of age was thrown into an apoplectic stupor by the alcoholic vapour of eau de Cologne. In this manner a . child might be destroyed, and no trace of the poison found in the stomach. Appearances.—The stomach has been found intensely congested or inflamed, the mucous membrane presenting in one case a bright red, and in another a dark red-brown ,colour. When .death has taken place rapidly, there may be the special odour of the kind of spirits taken in the contents; ;but this will not be perceived if the quantity taken was small, or many hours have elapsed before the inspection is made. The brain and its membranes are found congested, and, in some instances, there is effusion of blood or serum beneath the inner membrane {pia mater). Analysis.—When a large , dose has been taken, and the case has proved rapidly fatal, the contents of the stomach may have the odour of alcohol, or of the alcoholic hquid taken. ' The odour, however, is not always perceptible, and it may be easily concealed by other odours. In a case of poisoning with gin, the liquid drawn from the stomach by the pump after seven hours had no odour. The smell of brandy has entirely disappeared in twelve hours. The contents of the stomach or the suspected .liquid should be dis- tilled in a water-bath, with a proper condensing, apparatus attached (Fig. 8, p. 109). If the liquid has an acid reaction, it should be first neutralized with a solution of carbonate of sodium. The watery dis- tillate obtained should be submitted to a second distillation in a smaller retort heated by a water-bath. The liquid obtained by the second distillation may be identified by its odour, taste, and inflammabihty. Its specific gravity should be taken, and from this the percentage of alcohol may be deduced by tables. Alcohol may be recognized by the two following tests:—1. Mix a little of the distillate with enough solution of bichromate of potassium to give it a good orange colour. Now pour in an equal volume of strong sulphuric acid, and gently agitate the tube so as to mix the solutions; if alcohol be present, the liquid will become green, and the peculiar odour of aldehyd will be perceived. 2. To a portion of the distillate add some solution of potash and then a solution of iodine in iodide of potassium, till a perma- nent brown tint is obtained. Now add enough of the potash solution to discharge the colour, and warm gently. If alcohol be present, a turbidity will appear in the solution, but will disappear as the boiling point is approached; and the pecuhar odour of iodoform will be per- ceived. On cooling and standing for some hours, the iodoform will settle to the bottom of the vessel in the form of beautiful resetted crystals.


[197/872 b22652516_0197.jp2]

ETHER. NITROUS ETHER. CHLOROFORM. 185 Ether. Symptoms and Effects.—Ether, in moderate doses, has a hot burning taste, and produces, during swallowing, a sense of heat and constric- tion in the throat. It causes, like alcohol, great excitement and ex- hilaration, with subsequent intoxication; but persons may become habituated to its use, and thus, after a time, it may be taken in large quantities with comparative impunity. Ether drinking for the purpose of intoxicating is common in Ireland (' Br. Med. Journ,' 1890, ii. p. 885). The effects produced, on the system, when a large dose has been taken, are similar to those occasioned by alcohol. Ether as a liquid has not, so far as is known, directly destroyed the life of a human being; but when its vapour ihas been breathed, it has caused death in several instances. (See ' On Poisons,' 3rd edit., p. 639 ; also 'Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1877, ii. p. 692; 1875, i. p. 585.) Analysis.—When ether has been taken, as a liquid, it may be sepa- rated from the contents of the stomach by the process described for alcohol. It is\well known by its odour and inflammability. Spirit of Nitrous Ether.—This compound is well known under the name of sweet spirit of nitre. It imay be regarded as a solution of nitrous ether in rectified spirit. In 1878 a- child, about three years old, drank between three and four ounces of sweet spirit of nitre. He was soon afterwards found,in a state of complete'collapse—cold, pulse- less, and insensible; both pupils were widely■ dilated and fixed, and the breathing was hardly perceptible. Before this the child had vomited undigested food, with a smell of spirit^ and the bowels had been opened. In spite of some reaction under treatment, there was no sign of recovery: the breathing became stertorous, and the>child died twelve hours after swallowing the hquid. On inspection, .there was a strong smell of spirit j the mucous coat of the stomach, as well as that of the duodenum, was inflamed. The membranes of the brain were highly congested, the vessels containing a large quantity of dark-coloured blood. The operation of this hquid resembled that of a mixture of alcohol and ether. This is the only fatal casovvwhich we have met with. ChLOROiFORM. Symptoms.—Chloroform, when swallowed, acts very uncertainly. As it is a liquid very sparingly soluble in water, and much more soluble in alcohohc liquids, it is not surprising that the greater or less fulness of the stomach, and the nature of its contents w^hen the poison is swallowed, greatly influence the result. The author regarded it as a not very active poison. In this opinion the editor cannot concur, since he has collected the reports of sixty-two cases, of which no less than nineteen proved fatal, or thirty per cent. Ehot has tabulated fifty-six undoubted pubhshed cases. (' New York Med. Rec.,' 1885, ii. p. 29.) The effects of chloroform when swallowed do not greatly differ from the severe effects of the inhaled liquid, except that the symptoms are more intensified, and last longer. A man, set. 53, of robust constitution, but given to drink, swallowed about one and a half


[198/872 b22652516_0198.jp2]

i86 CHLOROFORM. fluid ounces of chloroform, with suicidal intent. Six hours later he was found in an unconscious condition. When seen by Brasch his face was flushed, the mucous membranes slightly cyanotic, the eyes closed, the breathing quiet, 20 per minute, but occasionally embarrassed, owing to falling back of the tongue. From time to time he vomited and passed faeces involuntarily. The pulse was small, 80 per minute, the cornea insensitive, the pupils not contracted, and not reacting to light or other stimuli. The patient was absolutely insensible, and could not be roused. One-thirteenth, and a quarter of an hour later one-thirty- second, of a grain of strychnine was injected subcutaneously. The pulse became stronger, the patient began to move his hands and arms and to open his eyes for a moment or two; he spoke, though unintelligibly, and vomited mucus mixed with food. The vomited matter did not smell of chloroform. Ten hours after swallowing the poison the man recovered consciousness, and complained of thirst, a feeling of internal heat, and nausea. The vomiting continued, and next day there was great pain in the region of the liver, which was enlarged and tender. The skin and conjunctiva were jaundiced, the faeces slightly blood- stained. Towards the end there was great difficulty in passing water, and even with the catheter only a few drops of turbid yellowish urine could be drawn off. The patient became gradually weaker, and died, sixty-seven hours after swallowing the poison, of paralysis of the heart and pulmonary oedema. The temperature was normal throughout, the intelligence clear to the last. No post-mortem examination seems to have been made. (' Deutsch. Med. Zeitung,' April 7, 1890; ' Br. Med. Jour.,' 1890, i. p. 1089). Chloroform-poisoning is nearly always the result of accident or suicide ; but in 1886, a woman was tried for the alleged murder of her husband by means of chloroform and was acquitted {Reg. v. Adelaide Bartlett, C. C. C, April 1886). The pungent odour, sweet taste, and intense burning sensation which its contact with the mucous membranes instantaneously produces, would render the homicidal administration of chloroform by the mouth difficult, except the person were first chloroformed by inhalation. That persons can be successfully chloroformed during sound sleep has re- peatedly been put to the test. (Hussey, 'Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1880, ii. p. 251; Dolbeau, ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1874,1.1, p. 168 ; Quimby, 'Boston Med. Jour.,' June 17, 1880; Eliot,' New York Med. Rec, 1885, ii. p. 29.) The most prominent symptoms of chloroform-poisoning are, after a transient state of excitement or inebriation, muscular relaxation, abolition of sensation and consciousness—which may supervene within five minutes, though it is usually longer delayed—and profound narcosis with stertorous respiration. The pupils of the eye may be contracted or dilated. Reflex excitability is eventually abolished. Usually, if the stomach be evacuated, the patient recovers ; and fortunately chloroform commonly excites vomiting. But no vomiting may be excited by even a large dose ('Canada Lancet,' 1874, vi. p. 209); and death may result under such circumstances. Chloroform appears to destroy life by paralysing the action of the heart or lungs, or both organs.


[199/872 b22652516_0199.jp2]

187 CHLOROFORM VAPOUR. A boy, set. 4, swallowed a drachm or two of chloroform, laid his head on his mother's lap soon afterwards, and then lost all consciousness. In about twenty minutes he was insensible, cold, and pulseless. Mustard poultices apphed to his legs produced no impression or sensi- bility. The breathing was sometimes natural, at other times stertorous. He died in three hours. This is the smallest fatal dose recorded. Hofmann met with a case where 35-40 grammes, or 6-7 fluid drachms, proved fatal to an adult. This is the smallest fatal dose recorded in the case of an adult. One fluid ounce has in several cases killed an adult. Death has ensued at periods ranging from one hour to eight days. The post-mortem appearances are congestion, inflammation, and even ulceration of the lining membrane of the stomach; congestion of the mucous membrane of the bowels, and sometimes congestion of the lungs and of the brain. The blood is sometimes unusually fluid, and the post- mortem staining of the heart well marked. There is, however, nothing characteristic, except the odour of chloroform in the alimentary canal. H. C. Wood, jun., nearly killed a patient by the deep injection of half a drachm of chloroform. (' Therapeutics,' 2nd edit., p. 280.) Chloroform Vapour.—This vapour, when respired in a concentrated form, is speedily fatal to hfe. If it is diluted with a certain proportion of air, it produces insensibility, with entire loss of muscular power, and the patient rapidly recovers after the vapour is withdrawn. Cases of death from the inhalation of the vapour for surgical purposes have been numerous, and the symptoms and post-mortem appearances are not always well marked. In some instances death has taken place within two minutes from the commencement of inhalation. In one in which only thirty drops had been inhaled in vapour, the patient died in one minute, and in another so small a quantity as fifteen or twenty drops proved speedily fatah Its fatal effects do not depend so much on the absolute quantity, as on the proportion in which it is breathed in a state of mixture with atmospheric air. It has been stated that the average proportion of this vapour for medicinal purposes should not exceed 3J per cent., and that 4J is a maximum quantity to be taken with safety. The proportion should be only slowly increased. The vapour should not be given after a full meal, or while the person is in a sitting or erect posture. ('Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1875, ii. p. 778). The vapour of this liquid, operating through the lungs, has destroyed life more rapidly, and in a smaller dose, than any other poison known. Its fatal operation is sometimes suddenly manifested after the with- drawal of the vapour. It is thought that 20 minims in the blood at one time would prove fatal. It is to a fatty condition or flabby heart that the fatal effects are usually and often incorrectly ascribed. The theory of a flabby heart is quite unnecessary to explain the fatal results occasionally produced by chloroform vapour, even when administered by experienced persons. A case is reported of the murder of a woman by her lover by means of inhaled chloroform. The man subsequently shot himself. There is reason to think, however, that this was a case of attempted con- certed simultaneous suicide. (Casper's ' Handb. d. Grerichtl. Med.,' 6 Auf. ii. p. 557.)


[200/872 b22652516_0200.jp2]

i88 IODOFORM. SYMPTOMS. The recent report of the Second Hyderabad Chloroform Commission (' Lancet,' 1890, i. p. 149) shows that when animals are anaesthetised by chloroform, or by ether, respiration fails before the pulse ceases, con- trary to what was previously supposed to occur. The researches of MacWilham are in conflict with those of Claude Bernard, endorsed by the Second Hyderabad Commission. He finds that chloroform exerts a direct influence on the heart, and that the mode of cardiac failure under chloroform is a more or less sudden dilatation and enfeeblement of the organ. He further states that death from cardiac failure occurs where the respiration continues for several minutes after the heart has stopped. C Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1890, ii. pp. 890, 948.) In cases of alleged robbery and rape, it has been sometimes stated that the person assaulted was rendered suddenly insensible by chloro- form ; but chloroform vapour does not produce immediate insensibility, unless it also produces asphyxia and death. There can be no doubt that several false charges of rape have been made against medical men and dentists under the alleged use of this vapour. In general the statement of the woman alone has,been sufficient to show the falsehood of the charge. Analysis.—Chloroform is a heavy colourless liquid, sp. gr. 1*5, neutral in its reaction, sinking in water in heavy oily-looking globules, and only to a slight extent dissolving in this liquid. Jt has a peculiar fragrant odour. It is very volatile, but not readily combustible. It may be separated from other liquids by distillation at a low tempera- ture. It boils at 142° F., and evolves a vapour which, at a red heat, yields chlorine and hydrochloric acids. On this effect is founded a pro- cess for the detection of chloroform in .the blood, when it has proved fatal in the form of vapour. The editor has by this method succeeded in detecting chloroform in the blood of a man twenty-four hours after death from the administration of chloroform as an anaesthetic vapour. (See ' Princ. and Pract. of Med. Jurispr.,' vol. i. p. 406.) In organic liquids it may be converted into chloride by the action of alcoholic potash, and the chlorides may.then be estimated by precipitation with nitrate of silver. Chloroform is miscible in all proportions with alcohol, but not with diluted spirit. Proof spirit dissolves 15 per cent, by volume of chloroform; whereas spirit of ^5 per cent, under proof—the minimum statutory strength of brandy—takes up only 2 per .cent. Iodoform. This antiseptic is a poison. Schede, Kocher, and others have pub- lished cases where severe and even fatal symptoms have followed its external application. Many cases have still more recently been reported where toxic symptoms were developed after its use as a surgical dress- ing. These symptoms were, in two cases, drowsiness and stupor; in one, those of meningitis; and delirium in a fourth case, which termi- nated fatally. iSymptoms and Appearances.—The symptoms usually observed after poisonous doses are—faintness, headache, giddiness, confusion of ideas, drowsiness, burning pain in the stomach, delirium, convulsions, insen-


[201/872 b22652516_0201.jp2]

HYDRATE OF CHLORAL. SYMPTOMS. 189 sibility, general paralysis, a small pulse sometimes quickened and sometimes diminished in frequency, and the skin cold and livid, bathed in perspiration. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1882, i. pp. 903, 913.) Hydrate of Chloral. This substance, in doses of from twenty to thirty grains, operates as a sedative and narcotic. In very large doses, it has caused dangerous symptoms, followed by sudden death. Medical men who have taken it incautiously have died from its effects. Two instances of this kind are reported in the 'Med. Times and Gaz.' (1871; i. p. 367). No remarkable symptoms have preceded dissolution. The person has passed at once from sleep into death. Hunter's syrup of chloral contains 20 grains in each fluid drachm. Symptoms.—This compound produces after a short interval deep sleep, and, when carried far enough, complete loss of consciousness and sensibility. A lady took six doses of thirty grains each, and fell into a sound sleep. Every attempt failed to arouse her, and she slept into death. The principal post-mortem appearance was great congestion of the cerebral vessels. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1871, i. p. 132.) A lady took, in three doses, at intervals of four hours, seventy grains of choral. In two hours after the last dose, she suffered from severe cramps in the legs, a feeling of suffocation, swimming in the head, and inability to regulate her movements. Four hours after the last dose, her face was flushed, the eyelids were closed, and the conjunctivae injected; pulse 120 and bounding. She was with difficulty roused. She recovered in about sixteen hours. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1870, ii. p. 435.) A man took thirty grains and became unconscious almost immediately after swallowing it—the face and hands turned livid and cold, and breathing took place only at long intervals; indeed, for about five hours death seemed to be impending. He recovered. (' Lancet,' 1870, ii. p. 402.) A dose of one hundred and sixty grains was given by mistake to a middle-aged man. He recovered. Another case of recovery after a similar dose has been reported. ('Brit. Med.-Jour.,' 1878, ii. p. 437.) A lady swallowed, in the form of syrup, one hundred and sixty grains of hydrate of chloral at eight o'clock. About three or four hours after- wards she was seen in a state of unconsciousness, lying on her back: pulse 80, regular but small; respirations, 28 per minute ; pupils mode- rately contracted, but not altogether insensible to hght. She had vomited, and a frothy mucus oozed from her mouth. She was tempo- rarily roused by ammonia. She could not swallow. The stomach- pump was used, and the stomach freely washed out. Coffee was given by the rectum. Electricity was employed for an hour and a half, when she recovered her consciousness, and stated what she had taken. She recovered. N. Smith met with two instances in which sudden death followed ordinary doses, and in another case a drachm and a half thrown into the rectum produced insensibility and death. (' Lancet,' 1871, ii. p. 466.) It has been observed in reference to this drug, that during the sleep


[202/872 b22652516_0202.jp2]

190 HYDRATE OF CHLORAL. APPEARANCES, AND ANALYSIS. produced by it, the pupil is contracted, but that it immediately dilates on the person awaking. In other cases, the pupil has been found dilated and insensible to light. These facts show that there is con- siderable uncertainty in the action of this drug, even when similar doses have been given. A slight overdose may cause sudden death by syncope (' Lancet,' 1873, i. p. 640) ; and ordinary doses long continued may seriously affect mind and body. (' Lancet,' 1873, i. p. 789.) After an ordinary dose of twenty or thirty grains, a patient has slept for a quarter of an hour, and has then awakened with a sense of deadly faintness, the lips livid, the face pale, the pulse scarcely perceptible, and a feeling of intense exhaustion and impending dissolution, mingled with delirium, lasting for five or ten minutes. It appears to exert a de- pressing action on the heart, and in cases of heart-disease it may thus cause sudden death. (' Lancet,' 1871, ii. p. 32.) One case proved suddenly fatal by causing paralysis of the heart. (' Lancet,' 1871, i. pp. 227, 440, 473.) In 1889, a man was convicted of murder by hydrate of chloral, which he gave to his victim in drink. There is no doubt that the poison was given to stupefy with a view to robbery, and that death was not contemplated. {B,eg. v. Pardon, Manchester Ass., March 1889; 'Lancet,' 1889, i. p. 598.) (For the effects of chronic poisoning by this substance, see ' Lancet,' 1873, i. p. 695.) Death has ensued so late as ten and even thirty-five hours after adminis- tration. Fatal Dose.—It is difficult to assign a minimum fatal dose. A dose of thirty grains proved fatal in thirty-five hours to a young lady aged twenty, while there have been two cases of recovery in which doses of one hundred and sixty grains were taken, and one in which a man recovered after taking one hundred and eighty grains dissolved in syrup. (* Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1875, ii. p. 778.) Recovery in these cases was no doubt greatly owing to treatment. The editor met with a case in which a young man barely survived a dose of seventy grains; he afterwards became idiotic, and never entirely recovered. A patient may die in a few minutes, but more commonly survives for a few hours. Analysis.—The hydrate of chloral is a white, crystalline solid, of a peculiar lemon-hke odour, and has a pungent bitter taste. When heated on platinum, it melts and is entirely volatilized without com- bustion. It is not inflammable. Heated in a close tube it melts and does not rapidly solidify. It is distilled over in a liquid form, and after a time it sets into groups of crystals in the glass tube. It is very soluble in water. The solution is not acid, has no bleaching properties, and gives only a faint milkiness on boiling with a solution of nitrate of silver. It is dissolved by strong sulphuric and nitric acids without any change of colour. Potash and ammonia added to the solution convert it instantly into chloroform, which may be recog- nized by its peculiar odour. It is by this conversion that hydrate of chloral may be detected in the contents of the stomach. One hundred parts will yield seventy-two parts of chloroform. The liquid should be rendered alkaline with potash, and the mixture heated in a flask by a water-bath. The vapour which escapes may be tested for chloro-


[203/872 b22652516_0203.jp2]

191 ClMrHOR. TOBACCO. form by the process described at p. 188. Proctor thus detected it in a case of suicidal poisoning. The quantity of hydrate of chloral present in a strong solution, e.g. a draught, may be approximately determined by placing a measured quantity of the solution in a graduated and stoppered burette, and shaking with a solution of soda. On allowing the mixture to stand, the chloroform formed by the decomposition of the hydrate of chloral will form a dense layer at the bottom. Approximately each minim of chloroform separated represents two grains of hydrate of chloral. By adding a solution of soda of known strength to a definite volume of a solution of chloral, and when the chloral is decomposed titrating the uncombined soda, the percentage of hydrate of chloral in a dilute solution may be determined with considerable accuracy. Camphoe. Symptoms and Appearances.—Camphor operates on the brain and nervous system. In one case, a woman swallowed in the morning about twenty grains dissolved in rectified spirit of wine, and mixed with tincture of myrrh. In half an hour she was suddenly seized with languor, giddiness, occasional loss of sight, delirium, numbness, tingling and coldness of the extremities, so that she could hardly walk. The pulse was quick, and respiration difficult; but she suffered no pain in any part. On the administration of an emetic, she vomited a yellowish liquid smelling strongly of camphor. In the evening the symptoms were much diminished, but she had shght convulsive fits during the night. The next day she was convalescent; the difficulty of breath- ing, however, continued more or less for several weeks. This is the smallest dose of camphor which appears to have been attended with serious symptoms in an adult. Camphor has proved fatal to infants and children, the symptoms being chiefly vomiting and purging, with violent convulsions. A case of poisdning by camphor would be recognized by the odour of the breath, a symptom which would attract the attention of a non- professional person. The presence of this substance in the stomach would be at once indicated by its odour. CHAPTER 19. TOBACCO (NICOTIANA TABACUM). NICOTINE.—COCCULUS INDICUS.—PICRO- TOXIN.—CALABAR BEAN.—MUSHROOMS. Tobacco (Nicotiana tabacum). Nicotine. Symptoms.—The effects which tobacco produces, when taken in a large dose, either in the form of powder or infusion, are well marked. The symptoms are faintness, nausea, vomiting, giddiness, delirium, loss of power in the limbs, general relaxation of the muscular system,


[204/872 b22652516_0204.jp2]

192 NICOTINE. COCCULUS INDICUS. trembling, complete prostration of strength, coldness of tlie surface, cold clammy perspiration, convulsive movements, paralysis, and death. In some cases there is purging, with violent pain in the abdo- men ; in others there is rather a sense of sinking or depression in the region of the heart, passing into syncope, or creating a feeling of inpending dissolution. With the above-mentioned symptoms there is dilatation of the pupils with insensibility to light, dimness of sight with confusion of ideas, a small, weak, and scarcely perceptible pulse, difficulty of breathing, and involuntary discharge of urine. Tobacco owes its poisonous properties to the presence of a volatile alkaloid, nicotine. Nicotine.—This is a liquid alkaloid, a deadly poison, and, like prussic acid, it destroys life in small doses with great* rapidity. . It has the powerful odour of tobacco. It is volatile, and may be procured by distillation. The author found that a rabbit was killed by a single drop in three minutes and a half. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1858, p. 355.) A celebrated case of poisoning by this alkaloid which occurred in Belgium in 1851, was the subject of a trial for murder—case of the Count Bocarme. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1851, t. 2; pp.. 147, 167.) In another, which proved fatal in from three to-five minutes, the appearances observed were a general relaxation of the muscles, prominent and staring eyes, bloated features, great fulness with lividity about the skin of the neck. There was no odour resembling nicotine or tobacco perceptible about the body. When the body was examined between two and three days after death, putrefaction had occurred. The swelling of the neck was found to arise from an effusion of dark liquid blood, especially in the course of the veins. The scalp and the mem- branes of the brain were filled with dark-coloured blood. The lungs were engorged, and of a dark purple colour. The cavities of the heart were empty, with the exception of the left auricle, which contained two drachms of dark-coloured blood. The stomach contained a chocolate-coloured fluid, in which nicotine was detected : the mucous membrane was of a dark crimson-red colour from the most intense congestion. There was no odour excepting that of putrefaction. The liver was congested and of a purplish-black colour. The blood throughout the body was black and liquid, but in some parts it had the consistency of treacle. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1858, p. 355.) The insidious nature of this poison is proved by the fact that, in 1877, a child, set. 3, died; from using, an old wooden pipe, for blowing soap- bubbles. It had been used by his father for smoking, but had been put by for a year. He had washed it before giving it to his son. The child was quite well at the time, but in an hour he was seized with drowsiness and sickness, and died with the symptoms of narcotic poisoning. The child had imbibed sufficient nicotine from the pipe to destroy life. Levant Nut (Cocculus indicus). Symptoms and Effects.—This is the fruit or berry of the Anamirta Cocculus {Levant Nut), imported from the East Indies. The berry


[205/872 b22652516_0205.jp2]

0 COCCQLUS INDICUS. CALABAR BEAN. contains from one to two per cent, of a poisonous bitter substance {Picrotoxin). The shell or husk contains no picrotoxin, but a non- poisonous principle called Menispermin (see Fig. 22). The seeds, in powder or decoction, give rise to nausea, vomiting, and griping pains, followed by stupor and intoxication. There are only two well-authenti- cated instances of this substance having proved fatal to man. Several men suffered from this poison in 1829, near Liverpool: each had a glass of rum strongly impreg- nated with Cocculus indicus. One died that evening; the rest re- covered. (Traill's' Outhnes,' 146.) Of the second case, the following details have been published: A boy, set. 12, was persuaded by a, Berry of Cocculus indicus, natural size, his companions to swallow forty &, The same, seen in section with one-half grains of a eomposition used for xhl trndTciroinrptcrotoxin. poisoning fish. It contained Coc- culus indicus. In a few minutes he perceived an unpleasant taste with burning pain in the gullet and stomach, not relieved by frequent vomiting—as well as pain extending over the whole of the abdomen. In spite of treatment, a violent attack of gastro-enteritis supervened, and there was much febrile excitement, followed by delirium and purging, under which the patient sank on the nineteenth day after taking the poison. On inspection, the vessels of the pia mater were congested with dark-coloured liquid blood. There was serous effusion in the ventricles of the brain, and the right lung was congested. In the abdomen there were all the marks of advanced peritonitis. The stomach was discoloured, and its coats were thinner and softer than natural. (Canstatt's ' Jahresbericht,' 1844, 5, 298.) Porter, ale, and beer owe their intoxicating properties in some instances to a decoction, or extract, of these berries. (For some remarks on this adulteration of beer and other liquids, and a process for separating the poisonous principle, picrotoxin, by amylic alcohol, see ' Chem. News,' March, 1864, p. 123.) Cocculus indicus operates readily as a poison on animals, and it has thus been frequently used for the malicious destruc- tion of fish and game. In one instance referred to the author, there was reason to believe that 270 young pheasants had been poisoned by grain soaked in a decoction of this substance. Barber^s poisoned wheat for the destruction of birds owes its poisonous properties to Cocculus indicus. (See ' On Poisons,' 3rd edit., p. 679.) Calabar Bean (Physostigma venenosum.) The Calabar bean is a large leguminous seed of a dark colour, resembling a garden bean, but much thicker and more rounded in its form. It is brought from the western coast of Africa, and is there employed by the natives as an ordeal bean when persons are suspected of witchcraft. This bean owes its properties to the presence of an


[206/872 b22652516_0206.jp2]

194 CALABAR BEAN. SYMPTOMS. alkaloid called Physostigmine, or Eserine, which is used in surgery for contracting the pupil of the eye. Desiring to try the effects of this seed on himself, Christison took the eighth part of a seed, or six grains, one night before going to bed. There was slight sense of numbness of the limbs during the night, but in the morning no urgent symptoms of any kind. He then chewed and swallowed the fourth part of a been (twelve grains). In twenty minutes he was seized with giddiness, and a general feeling of torpor over the whole frame. He immediately swallowed an emetic, and thus emptied his stomach. The giddiness, weakness, and faintness increased to such a degree that he was obliged to lie down in bed. In this state he was seen by two medical friends, who found him prostrate and pale, the heart and pulse extremely feeble and tumultuously irregular, the mental faculties intact, with extreme faintness threaten- ing dissolution, but no apprehension of death on the part of the patient. There was no uneasy feeling of any kind, no pains or numbness, no prickling, nor even any sense of suffering from the great feebleness of the heart's action. There was the will, but not the power to vomit; and the limbs became chill, with a vague feeling of discomfort. Stimulants were employed; and warmth and pulsation, with a power of moving, gradually returned. Two hoars after the poison had been taken he felt drowsy, and slept for two hours more; but with such activity of mind that he had no consciousness of having been asleep. The tumultuous action of the heart continued. After this the symptoms gradually disappeared, and the next day he was quite well. (' Pharm. Jour.,' 1855, p. 474.) In 1864, fifty children were poisoned at Liverpool by reason of their having eaten these beans. The sweepings of a ship from the west coast of Africa had been thrown on a heap of rubbish; the children found the beans and ate them. A boy, set. 6, who ate six beans, died in a very short time. The principal symptoms were severe griping pains, constant vomiting, and contracted pupils. In addition to these symptoms, the face was pale, and the eyes were bright and protruding. In attempting to walk the children sta^ered about as if they were drunk. In 1864, two children, aged six and three years respectively, ate the broken fragments of the kernel of one nut. In about forty minutes they complained of sickness. One child held his head droop- ing, appeared sleepy, and his hands were powerless. He staggered and was scarcely able to walk. He complained of severe pain in the stomach, and made ineffectual attempts to vomit. Milk was given, and he then vomited. The child became quite prostrated; the pulse was feeble and slow, and the pupils were slightly contracted. Some pieces of the nut were rejected by vomiting. The other child had pain in the abdomen, and was listless, sleepy, and depressed. He vomited freely, some portions of nut being ejected. He could neither stand nor walk. His face was pale, the eyes were piercing, but the pupils and pulse were natural. In this case there was purging. The children recovered on the third day. ('Edin. Month. Jour.,' 1864, p. 193.) In cases in which it has proved fatal to animals it has caused


[207/872 b22652516_0207.jp2]

POISONOUS FUNGI. THEIR EFFECTS. much irritation and congestion of the stomach and bowels. (Dragen- dorff.) Fraser relates the case of two maidservants who were poisoned by tasting through curiosity some of the embryos of the bean. ('Edin. Med. Jour.,' 1863, 2, p. 131.) The editor has himself noticed a very marked diminution of respi- ratory depth from the hypodermic use of salts of physostigmine (eserine), the active alkaloid of the bean. The very contracted pupil of the eye is a characteristic of poisoning by this alkaloid. Poisonous Mushrooms (Fungi). No branch of toxicology has given rise to greater differences of opinion than the study of poisoning by fungi. Some authors have considered nearly every kind of mushroom as unfit for food; whilst others, again, seem to regard nearly every species as edible with safety. In inquiring into the causes of these discrepancies of opinion, it will be found that whilst some species of fungi are undoubtedly to be regarded as poisonous, since they contain an integral poisonous constituent or constituents which may be isolated in a greater or less state of purity, others produce injurious effects only under certain conditions, such as idiosyncrasy of the individual, decomposition of the fungus, &c. The morel and Hevella esculenta are highly esteemed kinds of mushrooms, and yet Keber relates the history of six persons who, after partaking of these fungi, were attacked with vomiting and diarrhoea which lasted for sixty hours. (' Preussische Vereinzeitung,' 1846, No. 32. See also 'J^rch. f. Exp. Pkth. v. Pharm.,' 1885, xix. p. 403; 'Med. Chron.,' iii. p. 219.) Poisonings by the common edible mushroom {Agaricus campestris) are rare, except when the mushrooms are decayed. Symptoms and Effects.—The noxious species of mushrooms act sometimes as narcotics, and on other occasions as irritants. It would appear from the reports of several cases, that when the narcotic symp- toms are excited, they come on soon after the meal at which the mushrooms have been eaten, and they are chiefly manifested by drowsiness, giddiness, dimness of sight, and debility. The person appears as if intoxicated, and there are sometimes singular illusions of sense. The pupils are dilated.. Spasms and convulsions have been occasionally witnessed among the symptoms, chiefly in fatal cases. In some instances these have been of a tetanic character, with great difficulty of breathing. (' Brit. Med.. Jour.,' ii.. 1874, p. 464.) When the drowsiness passes off, there is generally nausea and vomiting; but sometimes vomiting and purging' precede the stupor. If the symptoms do not occur until many hours after the meal, they partake more of the characters of irritation, indicated by pain and swelling of the abdomen, vomiting, and purging. In a case of poisoning by mush- rooms, there was slight vomiting about an hour and a half after the meal, but no violent symptoms until after the lapse of ten hours. Several cases in which the symptoms did not appear for fourteen hours are reported. ('Med. Gaz., vol. 25, p. 110.) In some instances the symptoms of poisoning have not commenced until thirty hours after the meal; and in these, narcotism followed the symptoms of irritation.


[208/872 b22652516_0208.jp2]

196 POISONOUS FUNGI. THEIR EFFECTS. It might be supposed that these variable effects were due to different properties in the mushrooms; but the same fungi have acted on members of the same family, in one case like irritants, and in another like narcotics. In most cases recovery takes place, especially if there is early vomiting. In the instances which have proved fatal, there has been greater or less inflammation of the stomach and bowels, with congestion of the vessels of the brain. (' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 46, p. 307 ; vol. 47, p. 673; and 'Jour, de Chim. Med.,' 1853, p. 694.) In the ' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1865, p. 382, are recorded two fatal cases —in a mother and daughter, who died from the effects of the Amanita citrina, a yellow-coloured fungus, gathered in mistake for mushrooms. The woman fried the fungi, and they were eaten for supper. No symptoms appeared for seven hours. The child, when seen by a medical man, was feverish and thirsty, and the pupils were strongly dilated. There was severe pain in the stomach, and a sense of con- striction in the throat. It became convulsed and insensible, and died forty-one hours after eating the fungi. The mother and another child suffered from similar symptoms; the mother partially recovered, but had a relapse, and died on the fifth day. No inspection of the bodies was made. One fatal case of poisoning by fungi was attended with symptoms of irritation resembling those caused by arsenic. There was no loss of consciousness or sensibility. A boy, set. 13, fried and ate for break- fast at 8"30 a.m. two fungi which he had found growing under a tree. He returned to his work without any complaint. At noon he had his dinner of pork and vegetables. At 1 p.m. he returned to work, where he remained until 6 p.m., working the whole time without any com- plaint. Soon after he reached home he complained of feeling ill, and vomited violently. Purging then followed, with severe spasmodic pain in the abdomen. These symptoms continued throughout the night until 6 a.m.; the bowels then ceased to act. At 11.30 a.m. he was suffering from constant pain in the bowels, occasionally aggi'avated ; there was tenderness over the abdomen generally, but especially over the course of the transverse colon, with vomiting every ten minutes, great thirst, warm perspiring skin, pulse 90, and great depression. At 3 a.m. on the second day he was again seen. Vomiting and purging had returned. There was great exhaustion, the pulse was imperceptible, the action of the heart feeble. He was lying in bed on his back, with the knees drawn up. Sensibility and consciousness were perfect. He complained of great pain in the stomach; there was tenderness over the abdomen, but no increase in size. In another hour he died, i.e. about forty-four hours after eating the fungi, and about thirty-four after the first setting in of the symptoms. Others partook of the fungi, but in small quantity, and they did not suffer. On inspection, the heart on the right side contamed a little fluid blood. The left ventricle was contracted and empty. The lungs were healthy, and there was only cadaveric congestion. The lining membrane of the stomach and small intestines was throughout injected; the blueish-red appearance diminishing in intensity as it approached the csecum.


[209/872 b22652516_0209.jp2]

POISONOUS FUNGI. THEIR EFFECTS. There were a few ecchymosed patches near the intestinal end of the stomach. The organ contained six ounces of a brownish hquid, resem- bHng thin gruel. The large intestines were empty and pale, and the spleen was congested; the other organs were healthy. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1863, 2, p. 536.) In many of its features, and in the absence of narcotic symptoms, this case resembled a case of acute poisoning by arsenic; the fact that nearly ten hours elapsed before the symptoms of irritation commenced, and that there was no blood in the matters discharged by vomiting and purging, were the most marked differences. In 1871, two children died from the effects produced by noxious fungi. Several other persons were placed in a precarious condition from the same cause. Some fowls died from eating portions of the mushrooms. Two children, a boy, set. 8, and a girl, set. 10, coolied some mushrooms for breakfast. The boy ate greedily of them, but permitted the girl to take only one mushroom. The symptoms produced in both children were similar, except that the boy had them in a severer and fatal form, and the girl recovered. Three or four hours after the meal the girl was seized with violent pains in the head and abdomen ; she vomited several times in the course of the day, was restless, thirsty, and had occasional muscular twitchings of the hands. During the night the symptoms increased in severity, and she slept but little. Next day there was slight diarrhoea. When admitted into hospital, fifty-four hours after the mushrooms were eaten, all her symptoms had nearly subsided. The boy was then collapsed, and died twenty minutes afterwards. His stomach was found empty and contracted; its mucous coat pink, with minute injection, and covered with a thick layer of dryish epithelium. The liver was fatty. (' Guy's Hosp. Eep.,' 1872, p. 228.) Cases of poisoning by fungi are reported in Husemann's ' Jahresbericht,' 1872, p. 534. A case in which a woman died in twenty hours from eating ordinary mushrooms was communicated to the author by Smith, of Shepton Mallet, in Aug. 1873. The symptoms resembled those already described. A man, set. 43, and his daughter, set. 5, suffered severely from eating the Amanita pantherina. The earliest symptoms appeared in two hours and a half after the meal. They were thirst, faintness, dehrium, nausea, paleness of the face, and cold extremities. After eleven hours there was stupor, with tenderness of the abdomen. In the child there was cyanosis of the legs, with contracted pupils. It was remarked that, even fourteen hours after the fungi had been eaten, portions of them were discharged by vomiting from the action of emetics. Both re- covered. An analysis of cases of mushroom-poisoning shows that when the symptoms are referable to the presumably decayed state of the fungi, these produce violent gastro-intestinal symptoms ; and that, as a rule, these symptoms appear only after the lapse of some hours, and then the course of the case is not unlike one of cholera. The fly-fungus {Amanita muscaria) contains a definite alkaloid {Muscarine), and when this fungus is eaten, generally in mistake for the golden mushroom {Amanita CcBsarea), the symptoms appear within half


[210/872 b22652516_0210.jp2]

198 POISONOUS FUNGI. ANALYSIS. an hour or an hour, though occasionally at a much later period; and they are of a cerebral character—the gastro-intestinal symptoms being either only secondary or altogether absent. Thus there is a state of excitement and inebriation, trismus, etc. Ponfick has made the extraordinary statement that an infusion of the ordinary mushroom is poisonous. This is contrary to common experience; and the children of rural districts often eat with impunity large quantities of uncooked mushrooms. Poisoning with mushrooms is usually the result of accident or mis- take. They are not taken for the purpose of suicide, and the author met with only one instance in which it was alleged they were in- tentionally given to destroy life. In Aug. 1873, a gardener in the metropolitan district was committed on a charge of murder for causing the death of a young woman by giving her poisonous mushrooms. The accused, it was alleged, had a motive for the act, but he denied that he knew the mushrooms to be poisonous. The deceased fried them, and had some for breakfast. She suffered severe pain, and died the same evening. Other persons who partook of them were also taken ill, but recovered. This form of homicide would be very difiScult to establish. It would be necessary to show that the mushrooms were really poisonous, and to the knowledge of the accused. None might be forthcoming, so that there would be no botanical evidence of their poisonous nature. But as persons have died from taking edible mushrooms, it might be alleged that there was nothing criminal in the act, and that the death was owing to idiosyncrasy. Analysis.—The discovery of portions of the undigested mushrooms in the matter vomited, or a description of the food eaten, or in the stomach after death, will commonly lead to a recognition of this form of poisoning. One of the most poisonous fungi, Amanita muscaria, or the fly-mushroom, renders the water in which it has been boiled so poisonous that animals are killed by it, while the boiled fungus is itself inert. The liquid procured from it is used as a fly-poison, whence the name of the fungus. It is an autumnal fungus of a rich orange-red colour, and owes its deadly properties to an alkaloid {Muscarin£). Much has been said and written on the methods of distinguishing the edible from the noxious fungi, but instances have occurred in which the former have produced symptoms of poisoning and have destroyed life. These fungi can be recognized only by their special botanical characters. Berkeley says, 'No general rule can be given for the determination of the question whether fungi are or are not poisonous. Colour is quite indecisive, and some of the most dangerous fungi, and amongst them the Agariciis phalloides, are void of any unpleasant smell when fresh, though the most wholesome may be extremely ofl'en- sive when old. Experience is the only safe test, and no one should try species incautiously with whose character he is not thoroughly acquainted.'


[211/872 b22652516_0211.jp2]

POISONING WITH HENBANE. SYMPTOMS. APPEARANCES. 199 CHAPTER 20. henbane.—atbopa belladonna, oe deadly nightshade.—poisoning by atropine.—datura stramonium, or thorn-apple. Henbane (Hygscyamus niger). Symptoms and Appearames —The seeds (Fig. .23), roots, and leaves of this plant are poisonous. When the dose is not sufficient to destroy life, the symptoms are—general excitement, fulness of the pulse, flushing of the face, weight in the head, giddiness, loss of power and tremulous motion of the limbs, somnolency, dilatation of the pupils, double vision, nausea and vomiting. After a time these symptoms pass off, leaving the patient merely languid. "When a large quantity of the root or leaves has been eaten—an accident which has occurred from the plant having been mistaken for other vegetables—^more serious effects are manifested. In addition to the above symptoms in an aggravated form, there will be loss or incoherency of speech, delirium, confusion of thought, insensibility, coma, and, some- Jig. 23. times, a state resembling insanity; the pupils are dilated y and insensible to light; there is coldness of the surface, cold perspiration, loss of power in the legs, alternating with tetanic rigidity, and convulsive movements of the muscles; the pulse is small, frequent, and irregular, the respiration deep and laborious. ('Med. Gaz.,' vol. 47, p. 641.) Occasionally there is nausea, with vomiting and purging. Death may take place in a few hours or days, according to the severity of the symptoms. The special effect of this poisonous plant is manifested in its tendency to produce a general paralysis of the ^ * nervous system. According to White, the biennial is Seeds of Henbane, more powerful than the annual plant. He reports the j^' Magnified 3S' case of a woman, set. 34, who swallowed, by mistake ' diameters, for a black draught, an ounce and a half of tincture of hyoscyamus. Symptoms came on in ten minutes, the most marked among them being a complete loss of power to move her legs ; insensi- bility and delirium followed; and it was six days before she began to recover. She entirely lost her memory. (' Lancet,' 1873, ii. p. 8.) The recent researches, however, of Gerrard show that the yield of alka- loids in the biennial does not greatly differ from that of the annual plant. (Year Bk. of Pharm., 1890, p. 347.) The poisonous properties of henbane are due to the presence of two alkaloids {Hyoscyamine and Eyoscine). These, with atropine, the active alkaloid of belladonna, are perhaps the only three known natural vegetable alkaloids that cause excessive dilatation of the pupil of the eye.


[212/872 b22652516_0212.jp2]

200 POISONING WITH BELLADONNA. SYMPTOMS. Deadly Nightshade (Atropa belladonna). Ateopine. Symptoms.—The symptoms which are produced by the leaves, berries, seeds, and root of belladonna are of a uniform character, and, as a summary, they may be thus described: heat and dryness of the mouth and throat, nausea, vomiting, giddiness, indistinct or double vision, delirium, great excitement, and convulsions followed by stupor and lethargy. The pupils are much dilated, and the eyes are insensible to light. In two cases which occurred to Tufnell, the pupils were con- tracted during sleep, although dilated in the waking state. (' Dublin Med. Press,' Jan. 5, 1853; 'Jour, de Chim. Med.,' 1853, p. 695.) A woman took by mistake an ounce of belladonna liniment instead of her medicine, and in about twenty minutes had passed into a state of insensibility. Copious draughts of mustard and water, and salt and water, were administered without provoking vomiting. She was in a state of coma ; the extremities were warm ; the abdomen was slightly hard; breathing was regular; pulse 70, fairly good. There was in- ability to swallow; the pupils were natural, but not sensitive to strong light. Three hours later her condition was not much changed: the coma was not so complete; there was some struggling, incontinence of urine, and the pupils unaltered. One-fourth of a gi*ain of morphine was injected subcutaneously. Eight hours later, coma had passed off, and was succeeded by delirium. Jerking of the tendons was present; she could swallow freely. The next day all the symptoms had dis- appeared excepting some dryness of the mouth and throat. It is noticeable that throughout the pupils were unaffected. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1884, i. p. 377.) Several deaths from the poisonous effects of the berries occurred in 1846. The following case was admitted into Guy's Hospital:— A boy, set. 14, ate, soon after breakfast, about thirty belladonna berries. In about three hours he had the sensation of his face being swollen; the throat became hot and dry, the vision was impaired, objects appeared double, and they seemed to revolve and run back- wards. His hands and face were flushed, and the eyelids swollen; there were occasional flashes of hght before his eyes. He tried to eat, but could not swallow on account of the state of his throat. In endeavouring to walk home he stumbled and staggered; and he felt giddy whenever he attempted to raise his head. His parents thought him intoxicated: he was incoherent, frequently counted his money, and did not know the silver from the copper coins. His eyes had a fixed, brilliant, and dazzling gaze; he could neither hear nor speak plainly, and there was great thirst; he caught at imaginary objects in the air, and seemed to have lost all knowledge of distance. His fingers were in constant motion; there was headache, but neither vomiting nor purging. He did not reach the hospital until nine hours had elapsed; when the symptoms were much the same as those above described. He attempted to get out of bed with a reeling, drunken motion; his speech was thick and indistinct. The pupils were so strongly dilated that there was merely a ring of iris visible, and the eyes


[213/872 b22652516_0213.jp2]

BELLADONNA. SYMPTOMS. 201 were quite insensible to light. The eyelids did not close when the hand was passed suddenly before them. He had evidently lost the power of vision, although he stared fixedly at objects as if he saw them. The nerves of common sensation were unaffected. When placed on his legs he could not stand. The pulse was 90, feeble and compres- sible ; the mouth was in constant motion, as if he were eating some- thing. His bladder was full of urine on admission. He continued in this state for two days, being occasionally conscious, when by a free evacuation of the bowels, some small seeds were passed; these were examined and identified as the seeds of belladonna. The boy gradually recovered, and left the hospital on the sixth day after his admission. The progress of recovery was indicated by the state of the pupils, which had only then acquired their natural size and power of con- traction. In three other cases which occurred at the same time, the berries having been baked in a pie, pains in the limbs, drowsiness, insensibility, and convulsions were among the symptoms. In two ' instances of poisoning by the berries, related by Moll, the symptoms bore a strong resemblance to those of dehrium tremens, but among them were some peculiar to the action of belladonna, namely, heat and dryness of the throat, loss of power of swallowing, incoherent speech, double vision, and strange spectral illusions, with occasional fits of wild and ungovernable laughter. On the following morning both these patients recovered as if from a dream ; but they sufi'ered for some time from languor, thirst, and dryness of the throat, and the pupils also con- tinued dilated. (Casper's ' Wochenschrift,' 1846, p. 26.) Two cases, showing the poisonous effects of the berries on children, are quoted in the ' Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' vol. 29, p. 452. The following case, which occurred in Nov. 1871, is remarkable for the fact that a woman recovered from a large dose of the extract. A nurse gave by mistake to a lady whom she was attending a belladonna liniment containing three drachms of the extract mixed with soap liniment. She vomited slightly, sufiered from dryness of the throat, difiBculty of swallowing, drowsiness, delirium, dilated pupils, fixed staring of the eyes, loss of power and difficulty of speech. Paralysis of the extremities came on, with great pain in the back. Emetics, with brandy and cayenne pepper, were employed with success. The woman recovered, but not until after five weeks from the time of swallowing the liniment. A child, nearly four years old, swallowed only two or three drops of a liniment containing belladonna. The child went to sleep for an hour, when it was seized with tremblings and convulsions, dilated pupils, delirium, and other symptoms of belladonna-poisoning. It recovered only after three days, this being indicated among other signs by the normal state of the pupils. (' Guy's Hosp. Gaz.,' June, 1878.) In another case, in which a lady swallowed four ounces of belladonna liniment, in addition to the usual symptoms speech was lost. There was complete paralysis of the legs, and a diff'used scarlet rash appeared on the neck and the upper part of the chest. She fell into a state of deep sleep, and, on her recovery in three or four days, her Hfe appeared to be a complete blank. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1876, ii. p. 678.) Such cases are common.


[214/872 b22652516_0214.jp2]

202 BELLADONNA. APPEARANCES, AND ANALYSIS. This poison readily acts through the unbroken skin. In one case equal parts of mercurial ointment and extract of belladonna were applied to the scrotum of a man. On the second day all the symptoms of poisoning came on, with flushed face and pupils dilated and insen- sible to light. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1877, i. p. 164.) The editor has seen severe cases of poisoning resulting from the application of atropine ointment to ulcers. Appearances.—The appearances observed in several fatal cases of poisoning with the berries were as follows: the vessels of the brain were congested with liquid blood; the stomach and intestines were pale and flaccid; there were some red spots towards the cardiac end. In other fatal cases, of which the appearances have been reported, the vessels of the brain and its membranes were found distended with thick black blood. Red spots have also been observed around the throat and gullet, and congested patches of a dark purple colour on the coats of the stomach. In some instances the mucous membrane has been completely dyed by the juice of the berries. A boy, set. 5, after having eaten a quantity of belladonna berries, went to bed, was very rest- less, vomited once, and died in convulsions about fifteen hours after having taken the poison. On inspection, the eyes were half-open, with an intense lustre, and the pupils dilated; the mouth was spasmodically closed, and the sphincter of the bowel relaxed. The cerebral vessels were distended with dark-coloured blood; the substance of the brain, cerebellum, and medulla oblongata presented numerous bloody points. In the throat and gullet there were several patches of redness. In the stomach there was some fluid with three open berries; the mucous membrane was of a reddish-blue colour in various parts. (Canstatt's 'Jahresb.,' 1854, p. 295.) Analysis.—The indigestible nature of the leaves, fruit, and seeds will commonly lead to their detention in the matters ^'ig- 24. vomited or passed by the bowels, or in the con- tents of the viscera after death. The seeds of belladonna are very small, and can be distin- guished by the microscope from the seeds of other poisonous plants. They are of a some- what oval shape and of a dark colour. Under a low magnifying power they present a honey- combed surface (Fig. 24). In henbane the surface a of the seeds presents more irregular depressions, ® ^ resembling those seen on certain corals or madre- ® pores. The colouring matter of the berry is of a NltumuSe^'^''"''*' ^ ^^^P P^^P^^ 5 turned green by alkahes, t,'Magnified 30 diameters, and red by acids. The leaves would be known by their botanical characters, and a decoction or infusion of them by the liquid causing dilatation of the pupil. Atropine.—Atropine is the name given to the active alkaloid of belladonna; it is a powerful poison. It has been asserted that atropine does not exist pre-formed in the belladonna plant, but that it is a product of the chemical processes employed upon a kindred base,


[215/872 b22652516_0215.jp2]

POISONING WITH ATROPINE. 203 hyoscyamine, found in the plant. Schiilte has shown that in the young plant hyoscyamine only is found; and in old plants both hyoscyamine and atropine. (See 'Pharm. Jour.,' 1890-1, p. 207.) From a medico- legal point of view this fact is not of much importance. Symptoms ot poisoning have been produced by the appKcation of a weak solution of atropine to the eyes. Bowles found that about l-60th of a grain repeated twice in half an hour, making l-30th of a gi'ain, dropped into the eye, produced in two adults, after some hours, loss of vision, giddi- ness, soreness of the throat, loss of power of swallowing, and widely dilated pupils. The latter symptom remained for eight days. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1876, i. p. 533.) One-eighth of a grain injected beneath the skin for the relief of sciatica caused all the symptoms of poisoning with belladonna. (' Pharm. Jour.,' May, 1862, p. 583.) One grain used hypodermically nearly proved fatal at Guy's Hospital; and in the follow- ing case (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1865, ii. p. 34) a man who swallowed, by mistake, a grain of sulphate of atropine in solution, had a narrow escape. In an hour afterwards, the following symptoms were observed: the pupils were enormously dilated, so that the iris of each eye was scarcely visible; the eyes moved restlessly from side to side. The pulse was very quick, and the patient appeared as if intoxicated. In another hour his hands were cold, the pulse weak, and there was loss of power in the limbs. He became restless, incoherent, and uncon- scious of preceding events. There was also dehrium. In a later stage there was morbid sensitiveness to sounds and objects; the tongue was furred and the skin dry and hot. The pupils continued dilated for a week, and for several days there was a partial paralysis of the bladder. He recovered in a fortnight. A fatal case of poisoning by sulphate of atropine is recorded by Greenway. A man, set. 45, swallowed by mistake a teaspoonful of solution of sulphate of atropine equal to half a grain of the sulphate. The usual symptoms of poisoning followed, but it is remarkable that the patient did not die until the sixth dsiv. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1878, ii. p. 516.) Cases of atropine-poisoning of a mild character are common in hospital practice, in consequence of atropine lotions, intended for the eye, being accidentally taken by children and others. In 1880, a boy, set. 12, was admitted to Guy's Hospital, who on the previous day had eaten some ripe belladonna berries whilst on a 90untry excursion. On returning home he went to bed as usual, but awoke at 2 a.m. in much the same condition as on his admission at 5 a.m. He was then deHrious, and in such violent convulsions that he was unable to sit still a moment. He talked most incoherently. He apparently could not swallow, as he put water in his mouth and spat it out again; the effort throwing him into severe convulsions. At 10 a.m. the delirium and convulsions still continued; there was a marked flushing on the legs and face, and the latter was somewhat swollen. The throat was red, and he showed aversion to water. The pupils were widely dilated. The dehrium continued, with convulsions, all day and during the next night, though occasionally he spoke ration- ally. He was flushed, and appeared like a child in the early stage of a


[216/872 b22652516_0216.jp2]

204 POISONING WITH ATROPINE. ANALYSIS. scarlatina rash. At noon—about forty-two hours after, as was supposed, the berries were eaten—one-third of a grain of morphine was injected hypodermically. The boy soon slept, and next day awoke well. In 1850, Sells forwarded to the author for examination, the stomach of a young man who had poisoned himself by taking two grains of atropine. He took the dose on going to bed. He was heard to snore heavily during the night, and was found dead about seven in the morn- ing, lying on his right side, the surface livid, the limbs rigid and con- tracted, and with a little brown matter issuing from the mouth. The pupils were much dilated. The mucous membrane of the stomach presented a diffused redness, which might have arisen from some brandy which he had swallowed. No trace of the poison could be detected in the stomach or the contents. A medical man was charged with attempting to poison his wife and other persons with atropine, which it was alleged had been placed in a rabbit pie. {Reg. v. Sprague^ Exeter Aut. Ass., 1865.) The evidence failed to show at the trial that the prisoner, or any other person, could have mixed poison with the pie, much less such a poison as this, which, in the dose of one or two grains, either destroys life or produces illness continuing for some time. The symptoms, as described, resembled those caused by noxious food, and diSered in many respects from those ot poisoning by atropine. The only fact on which this chemical theory seemed to rest was that the pupils of the eyes of those who ate of the pie and were taken ill were dilated, and a portion of the extract of the scrapings of the pie-dish is said to have caused a dilatation of the pupil of the analyst. ('Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1865, ii. p. 168; ' Chem. News,' 1865, ii. p. 72.) It is stated that the supposed poison was separated from the baked leg of a rabbit, by soaking it in dilute hydrochloric acid, but the whole of the scientific theory rested upon the dilatation of the pupils, and this, although presumptive, is not positive evidence of atropine having been administered. The criminal administration of atropine is a rare event in this country. A trial for murder by this alkaloid took place at the Man- chester Lent Assizes, 1872 (Reg. v. Steele). The prisoner, who was a nurse in the workhouse, was charged with administering atropine to the senior surgeon, and thereby causing his death. The deceased was taken suddenly ill after his breakfast, and died in about twelve hours with the usual symptoms of poisoning with atropine. The poison, a solution of atropine in spirit, was detected in the body, and also in a liquid found in the room. Milk was the vehicle through which it was taken. The milk as sent from the kitchen contained nothing injurious, but that found in deceased's room was tasted by two of the nurses, and both suffered from poisoning by atropine. The prisoner had access to this room, and it was alleged that she had a strong motive for this criminal act, but there was no direct proof to show that she put the poison into the milk, and she was acquitted. Analysis.—Atropine is a white crystalline alkaloid, sparingly soluble in water, but readily dissolved by alcohol, ether, and dilute acids. It does not readily crystallize, but forms readily crystallizable salts. It


[217/872 b22652516_0217.jp2]

205 POISONING WITH STRAMONIUM. may be detected in, and separated from, organic liquids by the process of Stas (see pv 212, posO- The test usually employed, in addition to the general tests for alka- loids, is a physiological one—the effect produced on the pupil of the eye by small quantities of hquid, or extract, containing traces of atropine. The pupil becomes largely dilated, and does not respond to light. There is nothing conclusive in this result, unless there is also evidence from symptoms that belladonna has been actually taken or administered. Thoen-APPLE (Datura stramonium). Symptoms and Appearances.—The symptoms produced by stramo- nium, whether the leaves or seeds are used, are as follows: soon after the poison has been taken there is giddiness, dimness of sight, a sense of fainting, insensibility, fixed and dilated pupils, flushed countenance, and a slow, great, and full pulse. Sometimes there is restlessness, with a hot and red skin, a wild and staring countenance, the breathing hurried and gasping, incessant talking without distinct articulation; and there are attempts to drive away, or grasp at, imaginary objects. There is picking at the bedclothes, with paroxysms of excessive laughter, and, if the person can walk, it is with a staggering gait, and he falls to the ground as if intoxicated or completely exhausted. The seeds of two varieties of datura were used by the Thugs of India for rendering their victims powerless and insensible. Appearances.—In a well-marked case of poisoning with stramonium seeds, in which death took place in less than eight hours, the following appearances were found: great congestion of the vessels of the brain and its membranes, the brain firm and highly injected, the choroid plexus turgid, the ventricles contained serum, the substance of the lungs congested, and the heart flaccid. The stomach contained about four ounces of digested food mixed with eighty-nine seeds of stramonium. There were two patches of extravasation in the mucous coat—one on the larger curvature, and the other near the pylorus. Many seeds and fragments were also found in the intestines. (' Lancet,' 1847, ii. p. 298). In another case there were marks of diffused inflammation about the cardiac end of the stomach. Analysis.—The seeds of stramonium, from which accidents have most frequently occurred, are flattened, kidney-shaped, but half oval, rough, and of a dark-brown or black colour. They are liable to be mistaken for the seeds of capsicum. Of the dry Datura stramonium there are about eight seeds to a grain. They are of an oblong kidney- shape, and of a dark-brown or black colour. The illustration (Fig. 25) Seeds of Datura Stramonium. a, Natural size. h. Magnified 30 diamaters.


[218/872 b22652516_0218.jp2]

NUX VOMICA. STRYCHNINE. 2o6 shows their appearance under a low power of the microscope. The leaves of the common Datura stramonium are well characterized by their peculiar shape. CHAPTER 21. NUX VOMICA.—STRYCHNINE.—SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES.—CHEMICAL AND MICROSCOPICAL ANALYSIS OF NUX VOMICA AND STRYCHNINE.—PROCESS FOR ORGANIC MIXTURES-.—DIALYSIS.—BRUCINE. Nux Vomica. Strychnine, or Strychnia. Symptoms.—At a variable interval after taking either nux vomica or strychnine in a poisonous dose, the person experiences a sense of uneasiness and restlessness, accompanied by a feeling of impending suffocation. There is a shuddering or a trembling of the whole frame, with twitchings and jerkings of the arms and legs. Tetanic convul- sions then commence suddenly with great violence, and nearly all the muscles of the body are simultaneously affected. The limbs are stretched out involuntarily, the hands are clenched; the head, after some convulsive jerkings, is bent backwards, and the whole of the body becomes as stiiEf as a board. As the convulsions increase in frequency and severity, the body assumes a bow-like form (opistho- tonos), being arched in the back and resting on the head and lieels. The head is firmly bent backwards, the soles of the feet incur- vated or arched, or everted, and the legs sometimes separated. The abdomen is hard and tense, and the chest spasmodically fixed, so that respiration appears to be arrested. The face assumes a dusky, livid, or congested appearance, with a drawn, wild, or anxious aspect; the eyeballs are prominent and staring, and the lips are livid. The intel- lect is clear, and the sufferings, during this violent spasm of the volun- tary muscles, are severe. The patient in vain seeks for relief in gasping for air and requiring to be turned over, moved, or held. The muscles of the lower jaw, which are the first to be aff'ected in tetanus from disease, are generally the last to be affected by this poison. The jaw is not always fixed during a paroxysm. The patient can frequently speak and swallow, and great thirst has been observed among the symptoms. In some cases of poisoning with nux vomica the jaw has been fixed by muscular spasm;. but, unlike the lock-jaw of disease, this has come on suddenly in full intensity with tetanic spasms in other muscles, and there have been intermissions which are not usually witnessed in the tetanus of disease. The sudden and universal convulsion affecting the voluntary muscles has sometimes been so violent that the patient has been jerked off the bed. After an interval of from half a minute to one or two minutes, the convulsions subside, there is an intermission, the patient feels exhausted, and is bathed in perspiration. It has been noticed in


[219/872 b22652516_0219.jp2]

SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES. 207 some of these cases that the pupils during the paroxysm are dilated, while in the intermission they are contracted. The pulse during the spasms is so quick that it can scarcely be counted, and the temperature of the body is much elevated. Slight causes, such as an attempt to move, a sudden noise, or gently touching the patient, will frequently bring on a recurrence of the convulsions. In cases likely to prove fatal, they rapidly succeed each other, and increase in severity and duration, until at length the patient dies, utterly exhausted. The tetanic symptoms produced by strychnine, when once clearly estab- lished, progress rapidly either to death or recovery. The person is conscious, and the mind is commonly clear to the last. He has a strong apprehension of death. The duration of the case, when the symptoms have set in, is reckoned by minutes, while in the tetanus of disease, when fatal, it is reckoned by hours, days, and even weeks. As a general statement of the course of these cases of poisoning, within two hours from the commencement of the symptoms the person either dies or recovers, according to the severity of the paroxysms and the strength of his constitution. Death sometimes takes place in a paroxysm. (' Lancet,' 1861, i. p. 572.) In 1885 {Reg. v. Day, Taunton Winter Ass.), a farmer was tried for the murder of a female relative by strychnine, but was acquitted, no red strychnine having been traced to the prisoner, although a red substance was deposed to as having been seen in the gruel, which was the vehicle in which the poison was administered. This is the only instance which the editor has met with of the criminal administration of strychnine as a red substance. (See Vermin-killers, p. 209, post.) In 1888, a gardener murdered his wife and son by means of pills containing strychnine substituted for ordinary purgative pills {Reg. v, Bowes, C. C. C., Jan., 1888). The editor has known extract of nux vomica sold and taken in mistake for extract of sarsaparilla, with fatal result. The time at which the symptoms commence appears from the re- corded cases to be subject to great variation. In poisoning with nux vomica they are generally more slow in appearing than in poisoning with strychnine. Until they set in suddenly, the patient is capable of walking, talking, and going through his or her usual occupations. In a case which occurred to Pellarin, a man swallowed about 300 grains of nux vomica, and no symptoms appeared for two hours. He died speedily in a violent convulsive fit. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1860, t. 2, p. 431.) Macredy reports a case of poisoning by a grain and a half of strychnine, followed by two fluid ounces of tincture of opium, where the symptoms of strychnine-poisoning did not manifest themselves till after the lapse of eight hours. The patient recovered. ('Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' 1883, p. 757.) Generally, in poisoning by strychnine the symptoms appear in from five to twenty minutes. ^ Appearances after Death.—In general the body is relaxed at the time of death, and stiffens afterwards; but the commencement and duration of the rigid state depend on various conditions. In some cases the body is found rigid and arched (opisthotonos), with incur-


[220/872 b22652516_0220.jp2]

STRYCHNINE. FATAL DOSE. 208 vated toes. {Reg. v. Day, p. 207.) Among the internal appearances which have been met with in different cases, are congestion of the membranes and substance of the brain, as also of the upper part of the spinal marrow, with congestion of the lungs. The heart is contracted and empty; but its right cavities in some instances have been distended with liquid blood. The blood has been found black and liquid throughout the body. The mucous membrane of the stomach has occasionally presented slight patches of ecchymosis or congestion, probably depending on extraneous causes, such as the process of digestion, the presence of food or of alcohohc liquids. In most instances the stomach and intestines have been found quite healthy, and it is not in the nature of this poison either to inflame or to irritate the mucous membrane. Of the appearances observed in poisoning with strychnine, there are none which can be considered characteristic. Congestion of the membranes of the brain and spinal marrow is probably the most common. Fatal Dose.—The sixteenth part of a grain of strychnine killed a child between two and three j^ears of age in four hours. The smallest accurately recorded fatal dose in an adult was in the case of Dr. Warner. Half a grain of the sulphate of strychnine here destroyed life. (' On Poisoning by Strychnia,'' pp. 138, 139.) So powerful are the effects of this drug in certain cases, that ordinary medicinal doses cannot be borne. The editor has known one-twelfth of a grain pro- duce poisonous symptoms. Hare states that many deaths are recorded from one-quarter to one-half a grain dose (' Boston Med. and Surg. Jour.,' Nov. 20, 1884, p. 482); but the editor has been unable to verify this statement. Symptoms of its poisonous action have frequently been unexpectedly produced. Fraser states that its action is most powerful through the skin. He found that when applied to rabbits hypodermically, from one-twentieth to one-fiftieth of a grain produced violent tetanic convulsions, followed by death in a few minutes. With respect to nux vomica^ three grains of the alcoholic extract have destroyed life. The smallest fatal dose of nux vomica in powder was in a case reported by Hoffmann (Med. Rat. Syst., ii. 175). Thirty grains of the powder, given in two doses of fifteen grains each, proved fatal. The poison was given by mistake for Peruvian bark to a patient labouring under quartan fever. This is about equivalent to the weight of one full-sized seed, and to only one-third of a grain of strychnine in the two doses. In fatal cases death generally takes place within two hours after the taking of strychnine. One of the most rapidly fatal cases recorded is that of Dr. Warner: the symptoms commenced in five minutes, and he died in tiventy minutes. In the case of J. P. Cook, the symptoms commenced in an hour and a quarter, and terminated fatally in twenty minutes. In poisoning by nux vomica, death may occur within two hours. Christison mentions a case in which a man died in fifteen minutes after taking a dose. This is probably the shortest period known. The longest period at which death has occurred was six hours after administration of the poison. The editor met with a case where


[221/872 b22652516_0221.jp2]

VERMIN-KILLERS. 209 death occurred in five hours and a half. (C. C. C, Beg. v. Barlow, 1875; see 'Rep. of Trials for Murder by Poisoning,' by Browne and Stewart, p. 268.) Vermin and Insect Killers.—Although it is difficult to procure strychnine at a druggist's shop, the poison is extensively sold to the public in threepenny and sixpenny packets, under the name of Vermin- killers. Butler's Vermin-killer consists of a mixture of flour, soot, and strychnine. The author found the sixpenny packet to weigh about a drachm, and to contain from two to three grains of strychnine. As the poison is mechanically mixed with the other ingredients (flour and colouring matter), and is probably manufactured on a large scale, the proportion of strychnine is liable to variation. The threepenny packet contains about half the above quantity of strychnine, but this is quite sufficient to destroy the life of an adult. In place of soot, Prussian blue is sometimes used as a colouring substance. The editor finds that there are two kinds of Butler's Vermin-kifler in commerce: in one the poisonous ingredient is carbonate of barium, and in the other strychnine. A sixpenny packet of the latter weighed forty-two grains, and yielded two grains and a quarter of strychnine. Another six- penny packet weighed sixty-two- grains, and contained one grain and three quarters of strychnine. Battle's Vermin-killer is a powder similar to that of Butler's, containing a fatal proportion of strychnine as it is sold in packets. The editor found a threepenny packet of Battle's Vermin-killer to weigh twelve grains, and to contain one grain and a quarter of strychnine ; and a sixpenny packet weighed twenty-five grains, and contained' two grains and a half of strych- nine. These powders are a fertile source of poisoning,, either through accident or design; they are openly sold by ignorant people to others still more ignorant, and are much used for suicidal purposes. Artificial ultramarine has been sometimes improperly used instead of Prussian blue or indigo for colouring vermin-killers. A powder of this kind is prepared in Bristol. Since the colour of the powder is at once discharged by any acid (such as that of the gastric juice and ordinary articles of food), the recognition of such a powder may entirely fail. The editor has met with a red vermin-killer in commerce, containing 50 per cent, of strychnine, coloured with 4 per cent, of vermilion. Bed strychnine—the crystals of the alkaloid superficially coloured by a secret trade process—is expressly made for the New South Wales market; and, in 1884, a quantity of this coloured strychnine found its way into English commerce. Arsenic and strychnine are used together in some vermin-killers. Chemical Analysis.—Nux vomica is well known as a flat round kernel, about the size of a shilling, with radiating sOky fibres, slightly raised in the centre. It is of a light-brown colour, and covered with the fine silky fibres (see Figs. 26 and 27, p. 210). It is very hard, brittle, tough, and difficult to pulverize. The powder is of a grey-brown colour, like that of liquorice, and has an intensely bitter taste: it is sometimes met with in a coarsely rasped state. It yields to water and alcohol, strychnine, brucine, and some other vegetable substances. p


[222/872 b22652516_0222.jp2]

2IO STRYCHNINE. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. Heated on platinum-foil, it burns with a yellow smoky flame. Nitric acid turns it of a dark orange-red colour, which is destroyed by stannous chloride. These properties are sufficient to distinguish it from various medicinal powders which it resembles in colour; but the presence of any silky hairs or fibres revealed by the microscope (Fig. 28) would at once distinguish it from all other powders. They may be obtained from FiK. 26. Fis 27. c c Seeds of Nux Vomica, natural size, a, Convex surface; h, concave surface; c, hilum or umbilicus. the contents of the stomach or any liquid article of food by washing and decantation. They are quite insoluble in water. The aqueous infusion or decoction of nux vomica is deeply reddened by nitric acid, and is freely precipitated by tincture of galls. Ferric sulphate gives with it an olive-green tint. Strychnine.—This alkaloid may be readily obtained crj'-stallized from Fig. 28. Fig. 29. Hairs ot Nux Vomica, magnified Various forms of Crystals of Strychnine, 124 diameters. as they were obtained Irom au alcoholic solution, magnified 124 diameters. an alcohohc solution. The crystalline form is subject to great variation, according to the strength of the solution, rapidity or slowness of evaporation, the presence of foreign matters, &c. It is commonly seen in octahedra, sometimes lengthened into prisms of a peculiar


[223/872 b22652516_0223.jp2]

CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 211 shape, bevelled at the ends, and crossing each other at angles of 60° (see Fig. 29). There are as many as six or eight varieties of crystals, so that too much importance must not be attached to this branch of the analysis. As strychnine is procured from the solutions of its salts by the addition of ammonia, it is usually deposited in long slender prisms (Fig. 30). 1. Strychnine is white, of an intensely bitter taste, even when it forms only the l-30,000th part of a watery solution, or even much less. 2. When heated on platinum, it melts and burns like a resin, with a black smoky flame. 3. It is not perceptibly dissolved by cold water, requiring 7000 parts for its solution. 4. It is easily dissolved by acids, and it is precipitated from its concentrated solutions by potash or by ammonia, in which it is insoluble. 5. Strong nitric acid often imparts to commercial strychnine a pale reddish colour, owing to the Fig. 30. Fig. 31. Crystals of Strychnine obtained by adding Crystals of Chromate of Strychnine, ammonia to the sulphate, magnified magnified 124 diameters. 124 diameters. presence of brucine. 6. Sulphuric acid produces no apparent change in it; but when to this mixture either a small crystal of bichromate of potassium, of ferricyanide of potassium, a small quantity of black oxide of manganese, or peroxide of lead, is added, a series of beautiful colours (blue, purple, and violet) appear, passing rapidly to a cherry-red tint. Among these substances black oxide of manganese will be found preferable for use. Horsley suggested that a solution of strychnine should be sufficiently concentrated, and then precipitated by chromate of potassium: the crystals may be examined microscopically; they are gradually seen in tufts of radiated prisms of a yellow colour (Fig. 31). On being touched with strong sulphuric acid, the colour-reactions of strychnine are at once brought out. Chloride of gold is a delicate precipitant of strychnine. The precipitate, collected and dried, may be dissolved in concentrated sulphuric acid, and any of the colour-tests then applied to it. Iodic acid is not decomposed by strychnine or its salts, and


[224/872 b22652516_0224.jp2]

212 STRYCHNINE IN ORGANIC MIXTURES. sulphomolybdic acid gives to it slowly only a pale-blue colour. It is thus readily distinguished from morphine. In testing solutions of strychnine, the presence of alcohol should be avoided. In organic mixtures, a modification of the process originally sug- gested by Stas may be employed for the separation of the alkaloid. The principle of its operation consists in dissolving the strychnine out of the tissue or organ, very finely cut up, by means of rectified spirit mixed with a small quantity of tartaric or acetic acid, at a gentle temperature. The liquid is strained, the residue well pressed and washed with alcohol; and the acid solution of strychnine thus obtained is evaporated to dryness at a low temperature. The residue is exhausted with absolute alcohol, filtered, and the filtrate again evaporated to dryness at a low temperature. The residue is now taken up with water, filtered, and the liquid is neutralized by an alkali—potash, carbonate of sodium, or ammonia, the latter being in some respects preferable—and a slight excess of alkali is added. The alkaHne liquid is then shaken, in a long stoppered tube, with twice its volume of ether or chloroform, or a mixture consisting of four parts of ether and one of chloroform. These hquids dissolve the strychnine set free by the alkali. The ethereal solution is separated from the watery liquid by a pipette or by a stoppered tube, and submitted to spontaneous evaporation, when, if strychnine be present, the alkaloid will be obtained, but generally associated with oily and other organic matters, which may interfere with the production of crystals. The impure residue left by the ether is heated in a water-bath, with a few drops of strong sulphuric acid: this destroys the organic matter. Water is added, and the acid Hquid is filtered through paper, made alkaline by potash, and again treated with ether, when strychnine mil be obtained in small and slender prisms. The crystals, after an examination by the microscope (see Fig. 30, p. 211), are treated with sulphuric acid and peroxide of man- ganese, and the colour-reactions of strychnine, if the alkaloid is present, will appear. By this method strychnine has been detected in the liver of a person who died from this poison, although the organ was in a highly putrescent state. The process of dialysis (p. 74) will allow of the separation of strychnine, when combined with acids and in a state of solution, from blood, mucus, and other viscid organic matters found in the stomach. The liquid containing the salt of strychnine may be tested by evaporating a few drops and applying the colour-test. If thus found to be present, it may be neutralized by ammonia or potash, and shaken with ether or chloroform in order to obtain pure strychnine. In all cases the physiological test should be used to supplement the chemical tests for strychnine. A frog may be employed for this purpose. Whatever process may be adopted, the analyst should bear in mind that it is better to operate on a small quantity of strychnine in a pure state than on a large quantity in an impure condition. Strych- nine does not appear to undergo any change in the dead body from the process of putrefaction, but it may disappear from the stomach like opium or morphine, and owing to similar causes (see p. 170). In the case of Reg. v. Pearson (Durham Sum. Ass., 1875), where death was


[225/872 b22652516_0225.jp2]

213 POISONING WITH BRUCINE. clearly traced to strychnine, only 1-16th part of a grain was found in the body by Scattergood. Had the man survived a few hours longer, probably none would have been found. Cameron found that in the case of a man who died from strychnine administered by his step- mother, not a trace of the poison could be detected through the entire viscera. This question is now in a great measure set at rest. A person may die from poison, although none may be detected in the body. Among other cases that of Ghantrelle may be quoted as an illustration (see p. 170). The editor of this work believes that much smaller quantities of strychnine may be detected when mixed with organic matters than the author (Dr. Taylor) admitted; and that, vdth im- proved methods of analysis, which cannot here be given in detail, strychnine can hardly fail to be detected in the body in any case of poisoning by this alkaloid proving fatal within a couple of hours. As a rule, it may be readily detected in the urine during the course of a case of strychnine-poisoning; and also when the alkaloid is only being given in ordinary medicinal doses. That strychnine is absorbed into the blood unchanged is incontestably proved by the experiments of Vulpian, who killed a dog by transfusing into its veins the blood of another strych- nized animal. BRUeiNE. Brucine, or Bruda, is an alkaloid associated with strychnine in the seeds of the nux vomica, but it is more abundantly contaijaed in the bark of the tree. It is not so powerful a poison as strychnine, but the symp- toms produced by the commercial article are very similar. It is con- sidered to have from one-twelfth to one-fortieth, or, according to others, one-sixth of the strength of strychnine. Brunton finds that brucine acts very like strychnine, producing death by convillsions when injected into the tissues or the blood. When taken into the stomach, it often does not produce convulsions, owing to its rapid elimination by the urine. (' Jour, of Chem. Soc.,' 1885, p. 143.) When pure, death may be produced in animals without convulsions. It is not affected by the colour-tests employed for the detection of strychnine, and it acquires an intensely red colour on the addition of nitric acid. The red colour turns to a beautiful violet on the careful addition of a solution of stannous chloride. It is much more soluble in water than strychnine, and has a similar bitter taste. Its aqueous solution is strongly alkaline, and, by spontaneous evaporation, it yields groups of slender prismatic crystals arranged in a fanlike shape. Unlike strychnine, it cannot be crystallized from a solution in benzene, and only imperfectly from a solution in alcohol. Hydrochloric and iodic acids produce in it no change, either in the cold or when heated. Sulphuric acid gives to it a pink-red colour without carbonizing it. The sulphate of brucine crystallizes in well-defined prisms truncated at the ends. They are larger and longer than the prisms of strychnine (see Fig. 32, p. 214). From a case of poisoning with this alkaloid which occurred to Edwards, it is necessary to give a caution to medical men respecting the possible criminal use of brucine. The symptoms which it causes may so closely


[226/872 b22652516_0226.jp2]

2 14 POISONING WITH HEMLOCK, Fig. 32. resemble those of poisoning with strychnine, that, in the event of death, the latter poison only may be sought for and not found; the real poison, brucine, may be overlooked. The tetanic symptoms are more slowly produced by brucine, and the poison is not so rapidly fatal as strych- nine ; but these conditions may be altered by the larger quantity given. When, in any suspected case, the colour-tests for strychnine fail to show the presence of this alkaloid, nitric acid should be added to the crystal- line residue obtained (as in the pro- cess for strychnine) from ether or chloroform-ether. The intense red- dening produced by this test, with the other characters above mentioned, will indicate the presence of brucine. Sulphomolybdic acid (p. 169) also yields a striking distinction between the two alkaloids. While it slowly gives a pale blue with strychnine, it rapidly gives a deep brick-red colour, passing to brown-red, with brucine or its salts. Crystals of Sulphate of Brucine, magni' fied 124 diameters. CHAPTER 22. CONITM OR HEMLOCK.—CONINE.—WATER HEMLOCK.—CENANTHE CROCATA.— iBTHUSA CYNAPIUM.—FOOL'S PARSLEY.—WATER-PARSNIP.—LOBELIA.—FOX- GLOVE.—DIGITALIN—ACONITE.—ACONITINE—LABURNUM. Common or Spotted Hemlock (Conium maculatum). Conine. Symptoms and Appearances.—The effects produced by hemlock have not been unifonn : in some instances there have been stupor, coma, and slight convulsions; while in other cases the action of the poison has been chiefly manifested on the spinal marrow—i.e. it has produced paralysis. The poisonous effects usually appear early and advance somewhat rapidly. A peculiar muscular debility sets in; the lower limbs become weak, and eventually paralysed; the paralysis advances upwards, eventually reaching the respiratory muscles. There is diffi- culty of breathing, anxiety in the region of the heart, and, towards the close of life, convulsions, consciousness having been previously intact. The pupils are dilated, though not to the same extent as when atropine or a solanaceous plant has been taken. When the respiration becomes affected, there is marked blueness of the surface of the body. A man ate a large quantity of hemlock plant, by mistake for parsley. In from fifteen to twenty minutes there was loss of power in the lower


[227/872 b22652516_0227.jp2]

HEMLOCK SYMPTOMS. ANALYSIS. extremities; but he apparently suffered no pain. In walking, he staggered as if he was drunk; at length his limbs refused to support him, and he fell. On being raised, his legs dragged after him, and, when his arms were lifted, they fell like inert masses, and remained immovable. There was perfect paralysis of the upper and lower extremities within two hours after he had taken the poison. There was loss of power of swallowing, and a partial paralysis of sensation, but no convulsions—only slight occasional motions of the left leg; the pupils were fixed. Three hours after eating the hemlock the respi- ratory movements had ceased. Death took place in three hours and a quarter; it was evidently caused by gradual asphyxia from paralysis of the muscles of respiration; but the intellect was perfectly clear until shortly before death. On inspection, there was slight serous effusion beneath the arachnoid membrane. The substance of the brain was soft; on section there were numerous bloody points, but the organ was otherwise healthy. The lungs were gorged with dark fluid blood; the heart was soft and flabby. The stomach contained a green-coloured pulpy mass resembling parsley. The mucous coat was much con- gested, especially at its greater end. Here there were numerous extravasations of dark blood below the membrane, over a space of about the size of the hand. The intestines were healthy, except that they here and there presented patches of congestion in the mucous coat. The blood throughout the body was fluid and of a dark colour. In a case which was the subject of a trial for murder {Reg. v. Bowyer,^ Ipswich Sum. Ass., 1848), a child died in one hour after swaUowing part of a teacupful of a decoction of hemlock, alleged to have been administered by the mother. The child sipped the decoc- tion until it lost the power of holding the cup; it became insensible and paralysed, and died in the chair in a sitting posture. There were no morbid appearances, and no hemlock leaves were found in the body, these having subsided in the cup and been left in the dregs. The child had been poisoned by the upper stratum of clear liquid. The mother was acquitted for want of proof, the death of the child having taken place in secrecy. Analysis.—Hemlock is known from most other plants which resemble it by its large round smooth stem, with dark purple spots. The leaves are of a dark-green colour, smooth and shining. Every portion of the plant has a pecuHar and disagreeable smell when bruised, resembling cat's urine, or, according to some, the odour of mice. It is strongly brought out when the stem, leaves, or seeds are rubbed with a solution of caustic potash. An illustration of the seeds of hemlock is annexed (Fig. 33). They are peculiar in their form, and are easily distinguished from the seeds of other umbelliferous plants. There are three common ^3 ^ a. Seed of Hemlock, natural size. &, The same, magnified 30 diameters, c. Group of Seeds.


[228/872 b22652516_0228.jp2]

CONIA. CICUTA. (ENANTHE. 2l6 umbelliferous plants, indigenous in this country, that may be mistaken for hemlock. Conium maculatum, the true hemlock, has a round smooth stem blotched with purple, its lower leaves are smooth and lustrous, it has a general involucre of from three to seven leaflets, and a partial one of three leaflets; the fruit has wavy notched ridges. All parts of the plant when bruised have a special mousey odour. JEthusa cynapium, fool's parsley, is distinguished by its one-sided partial invo- lucre of three leaflets, and the absence of a general involucre ; the stem is hairy and striated; and the ridges on the fruit are neither undulated nor notched. Anthriscus vulgaris, common beaked parsley, has slightly hairy leaves, no general involucre, and a bristly fruit. Anthriscus sylvestris, cow parsley, has a striated blotched stem, which is downy below, a partial involucre of five or more leaflets, and a smooth fruit. A person may be poisoned by a decoction of leaves of hemlock, and no leaves be found in the stomach or bowels (case of Bowyer, p. 215). In this case the stomach had been emptied, and the contents lost, before it was sent for analysis. No trace of conia was found. Conine.—^The poisonous alkaloid of hemlock is known under the names of Conine, conia, coniine, conicine, and conicina. It resembles nicotine and ammonia in its volatihty, alkaline reaction, and in some of its chemical properties. It is a liquid of oily consistency, of a pale-yellow colour, powerfully alkaline, and has, when its vapour is diluted, a smell resemhhng that of mice, and an acrid bitter taste. It gives a volatile greasy stain to paper, and burns with a yellow flame and thick smoke.. In reference to tts presence in organic mixtures, it ■may be detected by its peculiar odour, or by distilling the liquid with a solution of potash and examining the distillate. It may also be separated by the process of Stas. The reactions produced by tests on small quantities should be distrusted, unless there is strong evidence of the action of the poison on the body from the sjonptoms. Water-Hemlock, or Cowbane (Cicuta virosa). Symptoms and Appearances.—The symptoms produced by the roots of this plant are giddiness, dimness of sight, headache, and difficulty of breathing. There is burning pain in the stomach, with vomiting, and these symptoms are accompanied by heat and dryness of the throat. Convulsions have been observed [to precede death. In the cases of three children who died in convulsions from this poison, Mertzdorff" found an injected state of the mucous membrane of the stomach, with redness of the air-passages, as well as of the cardia and pylorus; the vessels of the brain and the sinuses were filled with dark liquid blood. (Wibmer, 'Cicuta,' 119.) The roots of the five-leaved water-hemlock, (Enavthe phellandrium (Phellandrinm aquaticum), have been eaten in mistake for parsnips, and produced symptoms of poisoning. Hemlock Water-Dropwort (CEnanthe crocata). This umbelliferous plant, known also as five-finger root, or dead-


[229/872 b22652516_0229.jp2]

POISONING WITH (ENANTHE. 217 tongue, grows on the banks of rivers, streams, and ditches. It is one of the most poisonous of the order, and is considered to be one of the most virulent of English vegetaible poisons. It has often been mistaken for celery. Symptoms and Appearances.—In 1857, two cases of poisoning with this plant occurred at West Bdlden, in Durham. Two labourers ate some of the roots of the oenanthe. They were found soon afterwards lying insensible and speechless, with livid faces, swollen and protruded tongues, and there were convulsive movements of the jaws, with frothy mucus and blood about their mouths; the eyes full and projecting, the pupils dilated, the breathing stertorous and laboured, with occasional general convulsions. The men both died in an hour and a half from the time at which they were first discovered. On inspection, it was found that there had been bleeding from the ears; the abdomen was livid and swollen. The stomach contained a gruel-like liquid with some of the partly digested roots; on removing this liquid, the lining mem- brane was found congested and softened. The lungs were engorged with dark hquid blood, and the blood contained in the heart was in a similar state. Boyle, in whose practice these cases occurred, forwarded to the author a portion of the roots, and there was no doubt that they were the roots of the oenanthe crocata. Drinkwater gives an account of three cases of poisoning by this plant, in 1875, two of which proved fatal. It seems that three boys ate the roots and stems of the plant, which they supposed to be wild carrots. They had a sweet, nutty taste. One boy complained of feeling cold, and was attacked with severe vomiting and purging. After this he recovered, and was able to give evidence at the inquest on his two companions. A second boy was found dead in the road about fifty yards from the brook where the oenanthe grew. He had vomited, struggled, and been violently convulsed. His face was black, and froth had escaped from his mouth. The third boy was found in a similar condition—dead, with froth about his mouth. The post-mortem examination revealed congestion of the brain with black fluid blood, engorgement of the lungs and heart with the same, and congestion of the mucous membrane of the stomach. This organ contained the masticated root of the oenanthe, with some of the green leaves. (For other cases, see ' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 34, p. 288.) This plant is equally fatal to animals. Cameron states that forty-three oxen, turned into a pasture in which the oenanthe grew, were killed by eating the plant. Foaming at the mouth, shivering, difficult breathing, tetanic spasms, with pleurothotonos, or spasmodic bending of the body to one side, were among the symptoms. (' Lancet,' 1873, i. p. 918.) It is not often that attempts are made to destroy persons by the administration of these vegetable poisons; but a case occurred in France in which a woman attempted to poison her husband by mixing shoes of the root of this plant with his soup. His suspicions were excited by the acrid taste of the soup. The woman was tried for the crime, and Toulmouche deposed at the trial that the plant from which the root had been taken was the oenanthe crocata—that it was a power- ful poison, and might cause death in two or three hours. The prisoner


[230/872 b22652516_0230.jp2]

2l8 SYMPTOMS PRODUCED BY FOOL's PARSLEY. was convicted. (' Gaz. Med.,' Jan. 3, 1846, 18 ; also ' Jour, de Chim. Med.,' 1854, 533.) Analysis.—The cenanthe crocata can be identified only by its botanical characters. The leaves are of a dark-green colour, with a reddish-coloured border. They have no unpleasant odour when rubbed. The seeds, of which an illustration is annexed (Fig. 34), are pecuHar. The plant bears a greater resemblance to celery than most of the other umbelliferse. Its stem is channelled, round, smooth, and branched, of a yellowish-red colour, and growing to the height of two or three feet. The root, consisting of a series of oblong tubercles, with long slender fibres, is of a yellowish-white colour, and not unpleasant to the taste. It is the most active part of the plant. The leaves yield much tannic acid to water, but the decoction appears to contain no alkaloidal base, since the chloriodide of potassium and Fig, 34. Seeds of (Enanthe Crocata. a, Natural size; &, magnified 30 diameters, c, One- half of a Seed magnified, d, One-half natural size, e, Group of Seeds. mercury produces no precipitate in it. The roots and stems of this plant are more frequently eaten than the leaves or seeds. Fool's Parsley (^thusa cynapitim). Fool's Parsley, or Lesser Hemlock, is very common in gardens and hedgerows. The leaves so closely resemble those of parsley that they have often been gathered by mistake. Symptoms and Appearances.—In May, 1845, a girl, set. five years, in good health, ate the bulbs of the sethusa by mistake for young turnips. She was suddenly seized with pain in the abdomen, followed by a feel- ing of sickness; but she did not vomit. She complained of feeling very ill. On trying to eat, she could not swallow. She was incapable of answering questions, and her countenance bore a wild expression. The lower jaw became fixed, so as to prevent anything being intro- duced into the mouth. She then became insensible, and died in an hour from the commencement of the symptoms : so far as could be ascertained, there were no convulsions. A second child, set. three years, shortly after eating the same substance, was attacked with pain in the stomach, sickness, vomiting, and profuse perspiration. She soon


[231/872 b22652516_0231.jp2]

219 WATER-PARSNIP. LOBELIA. Seeds of Fool's Parsley. a. Natural size. h. Magnified 30 diameters, c, Group of Seeds. recovered, with the exception of suffering severe griping pains without purging; but these disappeared on the following day. A third child, of the same age, suffered from similar symptoms. Eecovery in the two last cases was probably due to the plant having been eaten on a full stomach, and to the effect of early and copious vomiting. (' Med. Times,' Aug. 23, 1845, p. 408.) This plant is known from garden parsley by the smell of its leaves when rubbed, which is peculiar, disagreeable, and very different from that possessed by the leaves of parsley. The leaves of fool's parsley are finer, more acute, and of a darker green colour. The seeds are also peculiar. They are represented in the annexed illustration (Fig. 35). Its flower-stem, which is striated or slightly grooved, is easily known from all other umbelliferous plants by the beard, or three long pendulous leaves of the in- volucrum under the flower. The flowers are white, whilst those of the garden parsley are of a pale-yellow colour. Jno. Harley denies the existence of poisonous properties in this plant. (See ' On Poisons,' 3rd edit. p. 745). Watee-Parsnip. This plant {Sium latifoUum and S. angustifolium or S. nodiflora) is not unlike the watercress, for which it has been mistaken. Two girls, aged five and three years respectively, died in 1882 from eating the leaves. After these were eaten, the younger child became suddenly ill and died; while the other succumbed two days later. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1882, ii. p. 26.) Indian Tobacco (Lobelia inflata). The powdered leaves of Indian tobacco contain an alkaloid, loheline^ capable of producing poisonous effects on the brain and spinal marrow, I attended with irritation of the stomach and bowels. When administered in doses of from ten to twenty grains, lobelia operates as an emetic ; but in larger quantity it may act deleteriously. In one case a man lost his life by swallowing one drachm of the powdered leaves, prescribed by a quack. This person was seen by a medical practitioner soon after taking the poison : he was evidently suffering great pain, but he was quite unconscious—the pulse was small, and the pupils were strongly contracted and insensible to light. He had vomited the greater part of the poison, suffered from spasmodic twitchings of the face, sank into a state of complete insensibility, and died in about thirty-six hours. On inspection, some fluid was found in the stomach, but none of the I powder. The gastric mucous membrane was intensely inflamed, and


[232/872 b22652516_0232.jp2]

POISONING WITH LOBELLA. 220 the vessels of the brain were gi'eatly congested. (' Pharm. Times,' 1847, p. 182.) The seeds of lobelia are equally poisonous. In the ' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1853, ii. p. 568, two cases are reported in which the seeds proved fatal. In one, the mucous membrane of the stomach was highly inflamed. Another case is referred to in the same journal (1853, i. p. 270). There have been many inquests and trials for man- slaughter in this country as the result of the improper administration of the leaves of the Lobelia inflata by ignorant quacks (' Coffinites'), calhng themselves medical botanists, and dealers in vegetable medicines. The medical evidence given on these trials has proved that in large doses lobelia is a most noxious drug. (See ' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 44, pp. 383 and 433; vol. 46, p. 384; ' Lancet,' 1853, i. p. 237 ; ' Pharm. Jour.,' Aug. 1851, p. 87; and for some remarks on the action of the poison, see a paper by Curtis and Pearson, ' Med. Gaz.,' 1850, vol. 46, p. 285.) Those who profit by the sale of this drug among the ignorant poor maintain the doctrine that it cannot kill, and never has been known to destroy life. In 1856, one of these quacks was convicted on a charge of manslaughter for killing a woman with overdoses of lobelia. Severe pain, followed by loss of consciousness and congestion of the brain, were the chief symptoms preceding death. The admission that in proper doses it was a useful remedy in spasmodic asthma was of no avail on this occasion. The man was sentenced to three months' imprisonment. {Beg. v. Boyden, or Jackson, Lincoln Sum. Ass., 1856.) A man named Riley Drake was convicted in the United States of having caused the death of a woman by administering lobelia in improper doses. (Wharton and Stille's ' Med. Jur.,' p. 522.) In 1882, a man suffering from heart-disease, and who was an enormous eater, took as an emetic a medicine containing lobelia prepared from Coffin's prescriptions. At the post-mortem examination, made twelve hours after death, an aperture about the size of a goose-quill was found in the lesser curvature of the stomach, and about two pints of liquid having a milky appearance in the peritoneal cavity. The stomach itself contained lobelia seeds and cayenne pepper. The dictum of the so-called Coffinites is that ' heat is life; and the want of heat, disease and death.' In accordance with their principles, their drugs are lobelia and cayenne. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1882, 2, p. 24.) In 1884 {Reg. v. WalUs, C. C. C, Jan. 1884), an herbahst was acquitted when tried for the manslaughter of an invalid woman named Sains- bury. The deceased, who was suffering from chronic lung-disease, took some of the prisoner's medicine, the essential ingredient of which was lobeha. She died in a few minutes. At this trial many herbal- ists, and two medical men, swore that lobelia was not a poison. The editor believes that, when full doses are given, the safety of the patient is usually ensured by the copious vomiting that ensues. When vomit- ing does not supervene, death may ensue. The woman Sainsbury died quickly without having vomited. Lobelia is seen in the form of a greenish-coloured powder (fragments of leaves). This powder acquires a reddish-brown colour with strong nitric acid, and is blackened by concentrated sulphuric acid. Iodine


[233/872 b22652516_0233.jp2]

POISONING WITH FOXGLOVE. 221 water has no effect upon the infusion. Ferrous sulphate, and ferric chloride, produce with it a dark-green colour—the ferric chloride very rapidly. The leaves and seeds contain an acrid substance called Lobelacrin. It acts Fig. 36. as a powerful emetic in doses of from one- ^^.^^^ half to one grain. The leaves of lobelia are ,^^^^^0 generally seen in fragments which do not j<^^^^^r readily admit of identification by the micro- ^^^^^^p^a^^s*^^^ scope. The seeds are very small, of a length- ^^S^^^^^^ ened oval shape (Fig. 36), reticulated on ^^^^^^^ the surface with projecting hairs or fibres, and of a light-brown colour. The discovery of (x, them among the fragments of leaves would ^ o ^ . ' « furnish a sufficient proof of the presence " - » ° of lobelia. In one case {Beg. v. Wallis, p. Natural sLe.'^'"*' 220), the editor succeeded, by a modifica- b,'Magnified to diameters. tion of Stas's process (see Strychnine, p. 212, ante)^ in extracting a quantity of the alkaloid, loheline, trom the stomach of the deceased woman. Lobeline is similar to nicotine in its properties. Foxglove (Digitalis purpurea). Digitalin. Purple foxglove is a well-known hedge-plant growing abundantly in England. All parts of the plant—the seeds, leaves, and root—are poisonous, owing to the presence of the poisonous principle, digitalin. The leaves, whether in the form of powder, infusion, extract, or tinc- ture, exert an action on the brain and spinal marrow, as well as on the stomach and bowels. They retain their noxious properties when dried. Symptoms and Effects.—Cases of poisoning with foxglove are not very common. A boy who took, by the advice of a quack, six ounces of a strong decoction of the leaves, suffered from vomiting, purging, and severe pain in the abdomen. After some time, he became lethargic, and slept for several hours; in the night he was seized with convul- sions. The pupils were dilated and insensible to light; the pulse was slow, small, and irregular; coma followed, and the boy died twenty-two hours after taking the poison. Gn inspection, the membranes of the brain were found much injected, and the mucous membrane of the stomach was partially inflamed. The prisoner was acquitted of the charge, because he had only given his fatal advice on the application of the friends of the deceased. ('Ed. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' 27, p. 223.) A young man swallowed a strong decoction of foxglove by mistake for purgative medicine. He was soon seized with vomiting, pain in the abdomen, and purging. In the afternoon he fell asleep. At midnight he awoke, was attacked with violent sickness, coHc, and convulsions; the pupils were dilated and insensible to light, the pulse slow and irregular. He died twenty-two hours after taking the poison. (Wibmer.) A few grains of the powdered leaves have been known to produce giddiness, languor, dimness of sight, and other nervous symptoms. A


[234/872 b22652516_0234.jp2]

POISONING WITH FOXGLOVE. 222 drachm has, however, been taken without causing death; but in this instance it produced violent vomiting. A common effect of this poison is to produce great depression of the heart's action. ' Blue-vision ' is said to be a not uncommon occurrence in poisoning by digitalis; i.e. the patient sees all objects as it were of a blue colour. Tardieu has also described a blue condition of the sclerotic coat of the eye as charac- teristic of poisoning by digitahs and digitalin. When foxglove has been taken in substance, i.e. in the form of seeds or leaves, or any portion of these has been swallowed in a decoction or infusion, fragments may be found in the stomach and bowels. In reference to the infusion, decoction, tincture, or extract, except there be sufficient to allow of the separation of digitalin, there is no chemical process known by which the poison may be recog- nized. If any fragments of leaves or seeds are found in the contents of the stomach or ^'^"'V^.oo^yJ'o'o food, they may be identified by the aid of the microscope. The illustration (Fig. 37) r. Sf+"!,l»fSfrepresents the seeds of foxglove: they are of a, Natural size. J^^.^^ , o 'm'',, b. Magnified 30 diameters, a reddish-brown colour, very small, oblong, and somewhat angular in shape. They have peculiar markings. By the aid of the microscope, they may be easily distinguished from the seeds of hoyscyamus, datura, belladonna, and most other poisonous plants. Digitalin is an active substance obtained from digitalis. The French and German articles are not identical; and both are amorphous mix- tures of several chemical substances. German digitalin is chiefly used in this country. The physiological actions of digitalin (so called) have been investigated by HomoUe ('Jour, de Pharm.,' Jan. 1845), by Bouchardat (' Ann. de Therap.,' 1864, p. 155), by Fagge and Stevenson ('Guy's Hosp. Kep.,' 1866, p. 37), and others. Commercial digitalin operates as a poison on man and animals in very small doses. One- sixteenth of a grain, which is considered to be equal to eight grains of the well-prepared powder of the dried leaves, is sufficient to cause symptoms of poisoning. Doses of from 1-11th to l-32nd part of a grain have lowered the pulse and caused nausea, vomiting, griping, purging, and an increased secretion of urine. (Pereira, ' Mat. Med.,' vol. 2, p. 528.) Doses of from one-quarter to one-half of a grain would probably prove fatal. Digitalin has acquired some notoriety by reason of the trial of Dr. De la Fommerais, at Paris, in May 1864, for the murder of a woman named Pauw. (See 'On Poisons,' 3rd edit., p. 801; 'Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1864, t. 2, p. 105.) Nativelle has ob- tained a crystallized digitalin from the foxglove. This was found by Goerz to be physiologically inactive. It is associated in commercial digitalin with digitalein, which possesses all the physiological activity of digitalis. The bark, seeds, berries, and leaves of the Mezereon, Privet, Holly,


[235/872 b22652516_0235.jp2]

223 POISONING WITH MONk's-HOOD. and Guelder rose have in a few cases given rise to symptoms of poisoning. TJiese poisons affect the brain and the alimentary canal, producing vomiting and purging, followed by insensibility and convul- sions. Accidents from these plants are not frequent, and when they occur there is usually sufficient botanical evidence of the nature of the poison taken. Monk's-hood (Aconitum napellus). Aconitine. This well-known garden plant is in some parts of the country called Wolfs-hane^ and in Ireland Blue-rocket. The roots, seeds, and leaves are highly poisonous, owing to the presence of the alkaloid aconitine ; the root is especially noxious, and when the leaves have fallen off it appears to possess its greatest virulence. These parts of the plant, when masticated, produce a peculiarly cool, numbing sensation, affect- ing the lips, tongue, and interior of the mouth generally. At first the root appears to be tasteless, as the effects are only strongly manifested after a few minutes. After tasting only a small portion of the dried root, this disagreeable sensation remains on the tongue and lips for several hours. In larger quantity the taste has been described as burning, and it is followed by a hot acrid sensation in the throat, and salivation. The roots of Aconitum ferox, the Indian bikh or bisch, and those of Japanese aconite from A. Fischeri, are also articles of commerce, and are as poisonous as the ordinary A. napellus. The official tincture, Fleming''s tincture, the extract, the alcoholic extract (not official), and the liniment, may all be productive of fatal results. Symptoms and Appearances.—In from three to five minutes after chewing the root of aconite, or after contact of any of its preparations with the tongue, a hot burning astringent sensation is experienced on the tongue, extending to the fauces and to the lips, especially the lower one. The sensation soon becomes very severe, and is accompa- nied by a certain amount of salivation and a sensation of swelling in the fauces, and there may be difficulty in the swallowing. The sensation is described by some as one of numbness, and there is a decided loss of sensation locally. Later the feeling is one as if the tongue had been seared with a hot iron. Vomiting generally sets in in an hour or two at the latest; and is usually severe and spasmodic. The patient feels cold, especially in the extremities, and the skin is cold, clammy, and perspiring. There may be a feeling of numbness extending over the whole body, or a sensation of impending paralysis. Poisoning by the root of aconite is by no means unfrequent. In the spring or autumn, the root is hable to be mistaken for that of horse-radish. It has been thus accidentally eaten on several occasions, and has caused death. A mistake of this kind led to fatal results in three hours in a case which occurred at Lambeth; and another set of cases occurred at Dingwall, in 1856. Here three persons were poisoned by reason of their having had sauce made with the root of aconite, served at dinner with roast beef in place of horse-radish sauce. They were healthy adults, and all


[236/872 b22652516_0236.jp2]

POISONING WITH ACONITE. 224 died within three hours and a half. These mistakes show deplorable ignorance, but there is always the risk of their occurrence when horse- radish and aconite are grown near to each other in a garden, at that season of the year when the leaves have fallen. A trial for murder by poisoning with the root of this plant took place at the Monaghan Lent Assizes in 1841 {Reg. v. McKonhey\ in which Geoghegan conducted the medico-legal investigation. The medical evidence was beset with difficulties, for no trace of the poison could be discovered in the body; and it was only by a close analysis of symptoms and appearances that the charge was brought home to the prisoner. The deceased had eaten for his dinner some greens dressed for him by the prisoner, and complained of their having a sharp taste; and this was perceived also by another person present who tasted them. It was ascertained that soon after the meal the deceased had vomited a greenish matter, and suffered from purging, restlessness, incoherence, lock-jaw, and clenching of the hands. He died in about three hours after having eaten the greens, but was not seen by a medical man while living. The chief appearance met with was in the stomach, where the mucous membrane was of a light, reddish-brown colour. Traces of vegetable matter were found in the intestines; but no poison could be detected, either by botanical characteristics or chemically. The symptoms suffered by a friend of the deceased, who had accidentally tasted the greens, were very characteristic of poisoning by aconite. In two minutes he felt a burning heat in the mouth, throat, gullet, and stomach; then a sensation of swelHng in the face,, with a general sensation of numbness and creeping of the skin. Kestlessness, dimness of sight, and stupor, almost amounting to insensibility, followed; and in about an hour after the meal he was found speechless, frothing at the nose and mouth, the hands and jaws clenched, appearing occasionally as if dead, and then again reviving. There was vomiting, purging, tenderness at the pit of the stomach, cramps, tingling of the flesh, and a burning taste in the mouth followed. This man did not entirely recover until after the lapse of five weeks. The prisoner was convicted of murder, and confessed before her execution that the powdered root of aconite had been mixed with pepper, and sprinkled over the greens. (' Dub. Med. Jour.,' vol. 19, p. 403.) The tincture of the root is a powerful poison. In 1853, a woman took by mistake seventy minims of Fleming's tincture of the root mixed with one grain of acetate of morphine. In a few minutes she became very thirsty, complained of a burning sensation and pain in her stomach, to reheve which she swallowed a quantity of cold water. In fifteen minutes there was violent vomiting, which con- tinued for two hours. She lost the power of standing, and was very restless. The pain in the stomach increased, and there were convulsive movements of the muscles. She was conscious until shortly before her death, which took place in about four hours after she had taken the poison. There were no general convulsions: the pain in the stomach was well marked throughout. On inspection, the membranes of the brain were congested, but the brain itself was firm and healthy.


[237/872 b22652516_0237.jp2]

POISONING WITH ACONITE. FATAL DOSE. 225 The lungs were healthy, the heart flaccid, the \70mb congested. The stomach contained some mucus, and the lining membrane at the larger curvature was reddened in patches, but otherwise natural. The mucous membrane of the duodenum was in a high state of inflam- mation, partially abraded, softened, and broken down. Some spots were of a very dark colour, passing into gangrene. In 1852, an Excise officer lost his life by merely tasting Fleming's tincture of aconite, under the supposition that it was flavoured spirit. He was able to walk from the Custom-House over London Bridge; but he died in about four hours after tasting the poison. The case of the man Hunt, who, in Nov. 1863, destroyed his wife and children by prussic acid, and himself by aconite, presents some features of interest in reference to the symptoms and appearances pro- duced by the tincture. The quantity taken by him was not determined; but the man was soon afterwards seized with violent spasmodic retching; the face was pale, the skin cold and clammy, the pulse small and hardly perceptible, and the action of the heart feeble. The pupils were much dilated, and the eyes brilliant and sparkling; the breathing was quiet and regular, except during the spasms. He complained of pain in his heart. In attempting to walk, he staggered, and had no power to raise his arms. He was perfectly conscious, called for writing materials, and wrote a few lines. He then became suddenly worse, and a quarter of an hour before his death lost all power and sensation in his Hmbs, the shai-pest pinches producing no impression. The pulse was imper- ceptible. There were no convulsions, but complete relaxation of the limbs at death from syncope three-quarters of an hour after he had taken the poison. On inspection, forty-two hours after death, there was great rigidity of \hQ muscles. The substance of the brain was firm and healthy; the vessels on the surface were filled with blood. The heart was healthy; the right side was greatly distended with dark fluid blood; the left side contracted and quite en^pty. The lungs were healthy. In the abdomen, the viscera were healthy, with the exception of the stomach and duodenum. There was great capillary congestion at the larger end of the stomach, the mucous mem- brane having a bright red colour. There were marks of irritation, with softening and separation of the muct)us lining, the whole of the mem- brane being in a highly corrugated condition. Traces of an alkaloid were found in the contents of the stomach. The deceased had provided himself with an ounce of the tincture of aconite, and had swallowed the greater part of this mixed with water. In 1884, the editor met with two fatal cases of poisoning by mixtures of aconite and belladonna liniments. The symptoms differed in no way from those of aconite-poisoning, except that the pupils were markedly dilated. In one of these cases he obtained aconitine and atropine from the stomach of the deceased woman, as was proved, not only by the chemical, but also by the physiological, properties of the alkaloids. A similar case has been recently reported. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1885, i. p. 327.) Fatal Dose,—Of the root 60 grains have proved fatal, but it is pro- Q


[238/872 b22652516_0238.jp2]

2 26 ROOTS OF ACONITE AND HORSE-RADISH COMPARED. bable that this is much in excess of the minimum fatal dose. Of the pharmacopoeial tincture two or three drachms might probably be fatal. Fleming's tincture is six times as strong, and twenty-five minims have killed an adult. Four grains of alcoholic extract have proved fatal. Of the official (non-alcoholic) extract two grains have proved fatal. It is very uncertain in its action; but is much less active than Fig. 38. ^Fig. 39. Root of Aconite. Root of Horse-radish. the alcoholic extract. The liniment is stronger than even Fleming's tincture, and eight times the strength of the pharmacopoeial tincture; twenty minims would probably be a fatal dose. Analysis.—The botanical characters of the leaves and root, when any portions can be obtained, will enable a medical witness to identify this vegetable poison. The root has been frequently and fatally mistaken for horse-radish, but there are these striking differences:—


[239/872 b22652516_0239.jp2]

227 POISONING WITH ACONITINE. 1. Aconite root is very short, conical, and tapers rapidly to a point (Fig. 38, p. 226). 2. It is externally of an earthy-brown colour, internally white, and of an earthy smell; and the cut surface is rapidly reddened by exposure to air. It has numerous long thin fibres proceeding from it. 3. It has at first a bitter taste, but after a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes it produces a disagreeable sense of tingling and numb- ness on the lips and tongue. 4. Horse-radish root is long, cylindrical, or nearly so, and of the same thickness for many inches (Fig. 39, p. 226). It is externally yellowish-white, and has a pungent odour when scraped. 5. The taste of horse-radish is sometimes bitter, but it produces an immediate hot or pungent sensation. The leaves of monk's-hood are of a dark-green colour and of a pecu- liar shape. When masticated they slowly produce on the lips and tongue the persistent sense of tingling and numbness, with the sense of coolness ob- _ ^^s- 40. served in the root. They are less power- ful than the root and seeds. The seeds are dark-coloured and differ in appearance from those of other poisonous plants (Fig, 40). AcoNiTiNE.—The chief alkaloid of A, napdlus is aconitine, aconitia, or aconi- tina ; and is, perhaps, the most formidable known poison, the fatal dose being prob- ably one-twentieth of a grain. A. ferox contains a closely allied alkaloid known as pseudaconitine; Japanese_ aconite ^^'e* fal'm^gnmSio' ma- roots yield a third alkaloid, japaeom- meters. tine. The editor has found (that all these alkaloids are toxic, producing similar effects when administered to animals, and that they are of almost equal physiological activities. Commercial samples of aconitine are of varying degrees of activity and purity; most of the German or * exotic' varieties being comparatively inert. Pseudaconitine and japaconitine are not articles of commerce. The statement of some authors that the special preparation known as Morson's is pseudaconitine, prepared from the roots of the Indian plant, is incorrect. The inertness of the exotic preparations is due to admix- ture with other and inert alkaloids, partly existent in the plant, and partly the products of decomposition during the manufacture. Indeed, the active alkaloids aconitine, pseudaconitine, and japaconitine readily undergo a kind of saponification and split up into an acid and a com- paratively inert basic body. Thus aconitine in ammoniacal mixture speedily splits up into another base, aconine, and benzoic acid. In 1880, three cases of poisoning with crystallized nitrate of aconitine occurred in Holland (' Schmidt's Jahresb.,' Bd. 189, p. 122; ' Berl. Klin. Wochenschr.,' 1880, p. 337); and one of them proved fatal. The first was the case of a weakly man, sixty-one years of age, suffering from chronic bronchitis and a febrile attack. For this there was prescribed a solution of nitrate of aconitine. The patient took five drops, con- taining 0 006 of a grain of the nitrate, at 7 p.m. This produced an


[240/872 b22652516_0240.jp2]

POISONING WITH ACONITINE. 228 astringent and burning taste in the mouth extending to the stomach. At 9 p.m. the dose was increased to twenty drops (= 0*025 of a grain); and this dose was repeated at 8 a.m., 11 a.m., 4 p.m., 9 p.m.; next day, at 10 p.m., a final dose of ten drops ( = 0-012 grain) was taken. In all one-seventh of a grain of the nitrate was taken in seven doses. After every dose the patient was seriously indisposed, so that eventually his life was in jeopardy. The symptoms were a feeling of coldness, cold clammy perspiration, severe vomiting, difficult respiration, great lassi- tude, and the patient felt as if he were about to become paralysed. There were intermittent deafness and blindness, and spasmodic twitch- ings of the whole body, but more especially of the muscles of the face. At one time he felt that he was dying, and stated that he had been poisoned. The respiration became stertorous and quickened; then slow and gasping. There was no loss of consciousness. It is not stated that there was any loss of sensation or any actual paralysis. In the second case, a man, set. 63, took an undetermined dose of the same medicine. When seen he had cold clammy perspiration, a weak, irregular, dicrotic pulse, and was conscious. The respirations were short, laboured, irregular, and superficial. The pupils were contracted, and responded feebly to light. There was no difficulty in swallowing. There was great precordial anxiety, and fades hippocratica. Suddenly, the pulse entirely ceased, though the cardiac beats could still be feebly heard ; and a deathly pallor supervened. The patient rolled from side to side of the bed. The pupils were now dilated. Tonic convulsions of the facial muscles set in, with trismus; then, three hours after the dose, clonic convulsions, and the patient lost consciousness. In five or six minutes muscular relaxation ensued, but the convulsions returned in a quarter of an hour. An hour later death appeared imminent. Vomiting now set in, the pulse improved, and in twenty-one hours the man was convalescent. The third case terminated fatally. Dr. Mayer, who had prescribed for the above patients, himself took from fifty to sixty drops of the solution of nitrate of aconitine prescribed for the first patient. This corresponds to l-13th to l-21st of a grain of the nitrate. It may be assumed that the dose was probably l-16th of a grain. The symptoms commenced in an hour and a half; but they were not accurately noted till 8 p.m., four hours after the alkaloid had been taken. He was then found with a small, weak, irregular, but not slowed pulse, cold skin, and contracted pupils. He had an astringent and burning pain in the mouth, extending to the stomach, and difficulty m swallowing. The tongue was swollen. There was great precordial canxiety. He com- plained of burning pain, weakness, and heaviness of the limbs— especially the lower, which felt cold. Suddenly vision was lost, and the pupils became dilated. Soon, however, they again contracted, and vision was restored. Vomiting was procured by tickling the fauces. At 4.40 p.m. severe convulsions first set in, with stertorous respiration, singing in each ear alternately, and deafness. Ether was employed hypodermically, and its use was followed by renewed vomiting and convulsions. The pulse nevertheless improved, and ether was again


[241/872 b22652516_0241.jp2]

229 POISONING WITH ACONITINE. injected. In a few minutes there was renewal of severe vomiting and convulsions, and the patient became unconscious; the pulse failed, and death ensued at 9 p.m., without return of consciousness, five hours after the administration of the fatal dose. On post-mortem examina- tion, the viscera were unusually charged with blood, and there was considerable hypersemia of the stomach and small intestines, so that the colon and rectum appeared pale and bloodless by contrast. The intestines contained faeces, there having been no stool passed during the illness; and the bladder contained two ounces and a half of urine. In these cases it was intended to give Friedlander's nitrate of aconi- tine—a weak German preparation. The dispenser used instead a crys- tallized preparation procured from Petit, in Paris. Plugge, to whom the analysis was referred, found that Petit's preparation was eight times more poisonous to animals than Merck's, and 170 times stronger than Friedlander's nitrate. He failed to detect aconitine in a benzene extract of the viscera. Alarming results have also been known to result from the adminis- tration of pills, each containing l-250th of a grain of aconitine, four times a day. The symptoms were developed on the second day. (' Lancet,' 1880, ii. p. 46.) In 1882 a medical practitioner named Lamson was tried, convicted, and executed for the murder of his brother-in-law, Percy Malcolm John. {Reg. v. Lamson, C. C. C, March, 1882) This is the only known case of the homicidal use of aconitine; and the only recorded case of fatal poisoning by English (Morson's) aconitine. On Dec. 3, 1881, Lamson visited his brother-in-law, aet. 19, who was at a school in Wimbledon. John, though a cripple, and paralysed below the pelvic region, was in good health at that time. In the presence of the master, Lamson gave to John a gelatine capsule, which he pretended to fill with sugar, but into which he had no doubt introduced a fatal dose of aconitine—perhaps the whole of two grains, which he had purchased a few days previously. This was done under the pretence of showing the youth how to use the capsules for taking nauseous medicines. Lamson then made a hasty departure. Twenty minutes or half an hour after swallowing the capsule, the victim was seized with pain in the stomach, which he at first called heartburn, and which he compared to pain which he had experienced on a former occasion, when Lamson had given him what professed to be a quinine pill or powder. In a box belonging to John there was found, after his death, a packet of quinine powders, some of which were mixed with aconitine, whilst others were free from that poison; and also pills containing quinine and aconitine. There is no doubt that attempts had been made on John's life on two previous occasions, by the administration of these articles furnished to his brother-in-law by Lamson. The boy was taken upstairs, and he vomited, and was in great pain. He said his skin felt all drawn up, and that his throat burned. When seen by Berry, one hour and forty minutes after the administration of the poison, he was lying on the bed, with great pain in the stomach. He complained of the skin of his face being drawn, of a sense of constriction


[242/872 b22652516_0242.jp2]

POISONING WITH ACONITINE. in the throat, and of being unable to swallow. He retched violently, and vomited a small quantity of dark-brown fluid. Half an hour later he was also seen by Little, and two hours and three quarters after the poison was swallowed a quarter of a grain of morphine was injected beneath the skin. This somewhat eased the patient's agony; but the symptoms returned with increased severity. At one time he was with difficulty kept lying down by the united force of two men. An hour later the morphine injection was repeated—one-sixth of a grain being used. Twenty minutes later he died, having been conscious almost to the last. Death occurred four hours and five minutes after the adminis- tration of the capsule, and not quite four hours after the commencement of symptoms. At the post-mortem examination, made by Bond, the only unusual appearances were—redness and inflammation of the cardiac end of the stomach, which had a blistered appearance; great congestion of the first portion of the small intestine (duodenum), and patches of congestion in other portions of the intestine in a lesser degree. The brain was hypersemic. The membranes of the spinal cord were congested. The lungs were much congested, more especially towards the posterior parts. The heart was very flaccid, as if sodden and stained with blood pigment. From a portion of the first ejected vomit, from the urine drawn off from the bladder after death, and from the stomach, stomach contents, liver, spleen, and one kidney taken together, the editor and Dupre extracted aconitine by a modification of Stas's process. The existence of this was proved by its general reactions as an alkaloid, by the peculiar sensation which it excited upon the tongue, and by comparison of its fatal effects upon mice with those produced by Morson's aconitine. The l-2000th part of a grain of Enghsh aconitine may be recognized by the taste-test, and the same quantity will kill a mouse within a few minutes. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1883, p. 307.) A solitary case of poisoning with German aconitine (Merck's) is very crudely recorded. An analytical chemist took eight grains of aconitine after dinner, with suicidal intent. Half an hour later the first violent symptoms appeared. A burning sensation in the mouth and throat first made itself felt, and this became more intense every minute; intense pains in the stomach ensued after thirty minutes, and these became so violent in a few seconds that the patient writhed, shrieking in the most dreadful convulsions, and trying to strike the wafl with his head. He was held with difficulty, and milk and oil were given. Very soon he became incapable of swallowing, was seized with spasmodic cough, and wanted to vomit. In spite of emetics, he could not vomit, however, until an hour after taking the poison, and tlien, with great exertion, a dark greenish fluid was ejected ; but this afforded no relief to the pain in the stomach, and the burning sensation in the throat, which rendered swallowing difficult. The application of the stomach-pump afforded no relief. Exhaustion ensued after violent convulsions, and the symptoms reappeared with renewed force. At the beginning of the third hour the pains and convulsions attained such violence that death was expected every instant. In the fourth hour, after repeated injections


[243/872 b22652516_0243.jp2]

231 POISONING WITH ACONITINE. ANALYSIS. of morphine, the patient seemed somewhat better. Previous to this he indicated that his skin was greatly irritated. This irritation of the skin, as of ants crawling, continued apparently the whole time, and, when- ever the intensity of the pains somewhat remitted, he scratched the skin of the face and breast in a convulsive manner, till these were sore. His eyes glared wildly, sometimes resting with a fixed stare on one point. The convulsions were repeated at almost regular intervals, and the inclination to vomit continued, although vomiting did not continue after the second hour. At intervals of about forty minutes, the patient seemed to lose consciousness, but only for a few minutes; and then the convulsions and the other symptoms reappeared with undiminished violence. Three hours after the onset of the symptoms, he became incapable of intelligible utterance, but indicated that he felt giddiness, and soon after he appeared to lose sight. He threw himself wildly about on the couch, screamed, and uttered fearful groans. Exhaustion and apparent coma ensued, and then renewed attacks of the most violent description. Then difficulty of breathing set in, and he appeared to suffocate. At intervals he was conscious, indicated that he felt pain in the head and stomach, and was very thirsty. The pulse and body temperature fell considerably, and before death, which occurred at the end of twelve hours, exhaustion and unconsciousness set in, with cold perspirations and deathlike pallor. Though death from asphyxia was all along expected, this occurred from syncope. The post-mortem appearances showed nothing unusual. The pupils were dilated, the interior of the mouth was pale, the brain and lungs were congested, the valves of the heart were very flaccid, the liver and kidneys were congested. There was inflammation of the stomach, and its mucous membrane was congested {sic). The alkaloid was found by chemical analysis in the contents of the stomach; but, very remarkably, none was found in the urine of the deceased. (' Med. Press,' May 24, 1882, p. 439.) Analysis.—Aconitine may be extracted from organic liquids by means of Stas's process for the separation of the alkaloids. In this way, and by applying the tests of taste and that of physiological action on animals (mice) to the substance thus extracted, a very minute trace of aconitine may be detected. No other alkaloid produces the same sensation upon the tongue as the alkaloid, or mixture of alkaloids, known as aconitine. It yields the general reaction of the alkaloids, and a colour-test with sulphuric acid has been described. This colour- reaction is, however, valueless, as it does not succeed with pure aconitine, and is due to the presence of impurity. Aconitine readily decomposes when in alkaline solution ; and hence it speedily disappears from liquids which remain alkaline, and can no longer be detected. The editor finds that its presence can no longer be detected in viscera where it was known to exist, should these become alkaline from putre- factive decomposition, and so remain for some time.


[244/872 b22652516_0244.jp2]

232 POISONING WITH LABURNUM. Laburnum (Cytisus laburnum). Symptoms and Effects.—The hark and seeds of the common Laburnum contain an active alkaloid, called Cytisine. A case of poisoning by the bark was the subject of a trial at Inverness. ('Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' Oct. 1843.) A youth, with the in- tention of merely producing vomiting in one of his fellow-servants, a young woman, put some dry laburnum bark into the broth which was being prepared for their dinner. The cook, who remarked a * strong pecuhar taste ' in the broth, soon became very ill, and in five minutes was attacked with violent vomiting. The account of the symptoms is imperfect, for the cause of them was not even sus- pected until six months afterwards. The vomiting continued thirty- six hours, was accompanied by shivering, pain in the abdomen, especially in the stomach, great feebleness, and severe purging. These symptoms continued, more or less, for a period of eight months; and the woman fell off in flesh and strength. At this time she was seen by a physician, who had been called on to investigate the case. She was then suffer- ing from gastro-intestinal irritation, vomiting after food, pain in the abdomen increased by pressure, purging, tenesmus, and bloody evacu- ations, with other serious symptoms. The medical opinion was that she was in a highly dangerous state. The woman eventually recovered. There was no doubt, from the investigation made by Ross and Christison, that her protracted illness was really due to the noxious effect of labur- num bark. A girl, set. 18, idly and unthinkingly put a small portion of a laburnum branch into her mouth, carr3dng it for some hours, and chewing it. It was described as of the thickness of the little finger, and two or three inches long. There were some yellow flowers with it, but she was not aware that she had swallowed any. In about half an hour she felt unwell, but she was not seen by a medical man until the day following. The symptoms were then great pain in the stomach, nausea and retching, but no vomiting; pulse 100, tongue white, great thirst, anxiety and pallor of countenance, dilated pupils, sense of fainting even while lying down, and great exhaustion. There was no purging. Under treatment these symptoms disappeared, and the girl recovered in about a fortnight. (' Lancet,' 1870, ii. p. 182.) In reference to poisoning with the seeds of laburnum, there are many instances recorded. In 1882, two fatal cases of poisoning occurred with some undetermined portions of the laburnum tree. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1882, i. p. 199.) The victims were two children, aged respectively three and eight years. The elder child was seized with vomiting and diarrhcea, headache, and prostration. In six hours the vomiting and diarrhoea ceased. She then made noises in breathing, and continued in much the same state till her death, fourteen hours after she was attacked. Next day the younger child became tired and sleepy, vomited, and complained of headache. She vomited freely and passed two motions. Five hours and a half after the commencement of the symptoms she was con- vulsed, and the convulsions continued till her death, eight hours


[245/872 b22652516_0245.jp2]

ANALYSIS. from the commeneement of the attack. On post-mortem examina- tion, some signs of irritation of the stomach and intestines were observed in each case. The contents of the stomachs of both children were examined by the eye and by the microscope, but no fragments of the structures of the laburnum were discovered. Good evidence was, however, obtained by Fairley, in both cases, of the presence of cytisine, the poisonous alkaloid present in the flowers, seeds, bark, leaves, and all parts of the common laburnum tree. A small portion of an alcoholic extract, made from the stomach and contents of the elder child, was administered to a mouse, which died in the course of a few hours. The flowers of this plant are highly noxious. A child, between three and four years of age, ate twelve laburnum flowers, and in about fifteen minutes it complained of sickness and severe pain in the stomach. The child vomited a quantity of mucus mixed with the yellow petals of the laburnum. An emetic was given : this cleared the stomach, and the child recovered. There was no purging. {' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1850, p. 219.) In one case a great diminution of the temperature of the body was noticed. The child recovered. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1883, i. p. 1117.) Analysis.—The poisonous principle of the laburnum is Cytisine, an alkaloid, having a bitter taste. It is difficult of separation, and at present has no well-defined chemical properties, except its insolubility in chloroform, and that it sublimes completely, whereby it may be identified. Hence, when administered in powder, infusion, or decoction, there are no chemical processes known by which the poison may be certainly detected. (' Pharm. Jour.,' 3rd ser., xx. p. 1017.)


[246/872 b22652516_0246.jp2]

WOUNDS, MEDICO-LEGAL DEFINITION. 234 WOUNDS AND PERSONAL INJURIES. CHAPTER 23. DEFINITION OP A WOUND. —DANGER TO LIFE.—GEIEVOUS BODILY HARM.— EXAMINATION OF WOUNDS.—DESCRIPTION OF WOUNDS.—CHARACTERS OF WOUNDS INFLICTED ON THE LIVING AND DEAD BODY.—ECCHYMOSIS IN THE LIVING AND DEAD.—EFFECTS OF VIOLENCE ON THE DEAD BODY.— ECCHYMOSIS NOT ALWAYS A RESULT OF VIOLENCE. Definition.—In a medico-legal sense, a wound implies a breach of continuity in the structures of the body, whether external or internal, suddenly occasioned by mechanical violence. The definition therefore includes injuries to the skin or mucous membrane of the outlets of the body, dislocations and fractures whether simple or compound, as well as ruptures of the \4scera. In a medical point of view, a wound is commonly restricted to those external injuries in which the skin is implicated, and fractures are excluded ; but in legal medicine the term has a much wider signification. Danger to Life.—When a wound has been criminally inflicted on a person by the wilful act of another, one of the first questions which presents itself for consideration is how far the injury is dangerous to life. In order to justify the detention of the accused, a magistrate may require a medical opinion, or a written statement from the surgeon in attendance. The meaning of the words ' dangerous to life ' is left entirely to the professional knowledge of a witness. It is not suf- ficient on these occasions that he should make a naked declaration of the wound being dangerous to life ; he must, if called upon, state to the court satisfactory reasons for his opinion ; and these reasons are rigorously inquired into by counsel for the defence. As a general principle, it would not be proper to consider those wounds dangerous to life in which the danger is not imminent. A wound of a great blood-vessel, of any of the viscera, or a compound fracture with depression of the bones of the head, must in all instances be regarded as a bodily injury dangerous to hfe ; because in such cases the danger is imminent. Unless timely assistance be rendered, these injuries will most probably prove fatal ; and, indeed, they often destroy life in spite of the best surgical treatment. When, however, the danger is remote—as in a puncture or laceration of the hand or foot, which may be followed by tetanus—or in a laceration of the scalp, which may be followed by erysipelas—or in penetrating wounds of the orbit, which may be attended by fatal inflammation of the brain or its mem-


[247/872 b22652516_0247.jp2]

DANGER TO LIFE. branes—the case is somewhat different. Such injuries as these are not directly dangerous to hfe—they are only liable to be attended with danger in certain cases and under certain circumstances; hence the medical opinion must be qualified. The law, on these occasions, appears to contemplate the direct, and not the future or merely possible occur- rence of danger; if the last view were adopted, it is clear that the most trivial lacerations and punctures might be pronounced dangerous to life, since tetanus or erysipelas, proving fatal, has been an occasional consequence of very slight injuries. A difference of opinion will often exist among medical witnesses whether a particular wound is or is not dangerous to life. Unanimity can only be expected when the judg- ment and experience of the witnesses are equal. The rules for forming an opinion^ in these cases will, perhaps, be best deduced from the results of the observations of good surgical authorities in relation to injuries of different parts of the body. Wounds causing grievous hodily harm.—-A wound may not be dangerous to life, but it may have produced ' (/Wevows hodily harm.'' This question is sometimes put, although the usual practice is to leave it to be drawn by the jury as an inference from a professional descrip- tion of the injury. The words have a vague signification; but it would, perhaps, be difficult to substitute for them others less open to criticism. They evidently refer to a minor description of offence, and are applied commonly to those injuries which, while they do not actually place life in danger, may be attended with considerable personal inconvenience, or be in some way detrimental to the health of the wounded person. Pollock, C.B., steited on one occasion that 'grievous bodily harm' would reasonably apply to such an injury as would render medicah treatment necessary. It is always a question for a jury whether the intent of the prisoner, in inflicting a wound, was or was not to produce grievous bodily harm. In some cases the nature or the situation of a wound, as well as the kind of weapon used, will at once explain the intent: so far the medical witness may assist the court by ^ving a plain description of the injury, as well as of the consequences with which it is' usually attended. It may happen either that the wound itself is not of a seriouS'nature, and yet the intention of a prisoner may have been to do grievous bodily harm to the wounded person; or the injury may be really serious, and yet the prisoner may not have intended to do grievous bodily harm. On a trial for man- slaughter (C. C. e:, April) 1^873), Cleasby, B., made the following legal distinction between a simple wounding and wounding with intent to do grievous bodily harm : There was, he said, no proof as to the instrument, if any, with which the wound was inflicted. The injuries were certainly serious, and it would be for the jury to say whether they were done with the intention to inflict grievous bodily harm. The intention, as it happened in this case, could only be inferred from the injury which really was done. Possibly the prisoner inflicted more harm than he really intended. Let us suppose that the wounded person is found dead, and an examination of the body is required to be made. The most difficult


[248/872 b22652516_0248.jp2]

EXAMINATION AND DESCRIPTION OF WOUNDS. 236 part of the duty of a medical jurist now begins. Among the numerous questions which here present themselves, the first which demands examination is whether the wound was inflicted on the body before or after death. Examination of Wounds.—In examining a wound on a dead body, its situation, extent, length, breadth, depth, and direction should be observed; whether there is about it effused blood, either liquid or coagulated; and whether there is ecchymosis, i.e. a livid discoloration of the skin from the effused blood. It should also be ascertained whether the surrounding parts are swollen, whether adhesive matter or pus is eff"used, whether the edges of the wound are gangrenous, or any foreign substances are present in it. Care must be taken that putrefaction is not mistaken for a gangrenous condition of the wound. The wound may be examined by gently introducing into it a probe or a bougie, and carrying on the dissection around this instrument, avoiding as much as possible any interference with the external appearances. The preservation of the external form will allow of a comparison being made at any future time between the edges of a wound and a weapon found on a suspected person. Of all these points notes should be taken, either on the spot or immediately afterwards. In the dissection, every muscle, vessel, nerve, or organ involved in the injury should be traced and described. This will enable a witness to answer many collateral questions that may unexpectedly arise during the inquiry. Another point should be especially attended to. A medical man has frequently contented himself with confining his dissection to the injured part, thinking that, on the trial of the accused, the questions of counsel would be limited to the situation and extent of the wound only; but this is a serious mistake. If the cause of death be at all obscure, on no account should the inspection be abandoned until all the important organs and cavities of the body have been closely examined; since it may be affirmed that a natural cause of death might have existed in that organ or cavity which the medical witness had neglected to examine. It rests with the practitioner to disprove the probability thus urged by counsel. In the medical reports on the examination of the bodies of wounded persons, care should be taken to avoid the introduction of any remarks in the form of inferences from the facts of the case {ante, p. 12). The facts should be simply recorded, and the inferences or com- ments reserved for evidence at the inquest or trial, or if required, the inferences should be stated separately after the facts. In making an inspection of the wounded body, the stomach should not be overlooked. Death may have been apparently caused by violence, and yet really be due to poison of which a portion may be found in the stomach or bowels. Deficription of Wounds.—It is impossible to impress too strongly on the mind of a medical witness that, in describing the wounds which he has found on the examination of a body, he should employ plain and simple language, and avoid as much as possible the use of technical or professional terms. The desire of a good witness should be to make himself understood; but this cannot be accomplished if


[249/872 b22652516_0249.jp2]

WOUNDS ON THE LIVING. he clotlies his ideas in language which is incomprehensible to educated men of the legal profession, and a fortiori to the class of men who constitute common juries. There are few assizes which do not afford many illustrations of the injury done to scientific evidence, and the clear understanding of a case, by the technical language in which it is given. A medical witness should, for his own credit and for that of the profession to which he belongs, employ plain and simple language in describing a wound, as well as in giving his evidence generally (see p. 33). Character!^ of a Wound inflicted during Life.—If we find about a wound marks of gangrene, the effusion of adhesive or purulent matter, or if the edges are swollen and enlarged, and cicatrization has com- menced, it is not only certain that the injury mmst have been inflicted before death, but that the person must have lived some time after it was inflicted. Marks of this description will not, however, be com- monly found when death has taken place within ten or twelve hours from the infliction of the injurj^ A wound which proves fatal within this period of time will present throughout much the same characters. Thus, supposing it to have been clean-cut, or incised, there will be traces of more or less bleeding, the blood having chiefly an arterial character, and it will be found coagulated where it has fallen on surrounding bodies. The edges of the woimd are everted, and the muscular and cellular tissues around are deeply reddened by effused blood. Coagula, or clots, are found adhering to the wound, provided it has not been interfered with. The principal characters of a wound inflicted during life are, then, the follomng:—1. Eversion of the edges owing to vital elasticity of the skin. 2. Abundant haemorrhage or bleeding, often of an arterial character, with general difliision of blood in the surrounding parts. 3. The presence of clots. The wound may not have involved any vessel, and there may be no appearance of bleed- ing ; still the edges will be everted, and the muscles and skin retracted. By an observation of this kind made on the body of a new-born child (case of FAi'hick, March, 1848), Prince was enabled to state that the child was living when the wound was inflicted, an opinion afterwards confirmed by the confession of the mother. Characters of a Wound made after Death.—If the wound on a dead body be not made until twelve or fourteen hours have elapsed from the time of death, it cannot be easily mistaken for one produced during life. Either no blood is efiused or this is of a venous character, i.e. it may have proceeded from some divided vein. The blood is com- monly liquid, and does not readily coagulate as it falls on surrounding bodies, hke that poured out of a wound in the living. The edges are soft, yielding, and destitute of elasticity; they are therefore in close approximation. The cellular and muscular tissues around are either not infiltrated with blood, or only to a very partial extent. There are no coagula, or clots, within the wound. In experimenting upon amputated limbs, the author found these characters possessed by a wound produced two or three hours after death, although they are best seen when the wound is not made until after the body has lost all


[250/872 b22652516_0250.jp2]

238 WOUNDS MADE AFTER DEATH. its heat. In wounds on the dead body, divided arteries "have no marks of bleeding about them, while in the living body the fatal bleeding commonly proceeds from these vessels. Hence in a wound on the living, it will be found that the surrounding vessels are empty. The absence of spirting of arterial blood may be of importance in deter- mining whether one of two or more fatal wounds was first inflicted. {Reg. V. Lee, Exeter Ass., Feb. 1885.) The chief characters of a wound after death are, therefore:—1. Absence of copious bleeding. 2. If there is bleeding, it is exclusively venous. 3. The edges of the wound are close, not everted. 4. There is no diffusion of blood in the cellular tissue. 5. There is an absence of coagula. But it may happen that a wound has been inflicted soon after the breath has left the body, and while it was yet warm. The distinction between a wound then made and one made during life is not so well marked as in wounds inflicted at a later period after death. In any case in which it is doubtful whether a wound was inflicted on a living or dead body, we should be cautious in giving an opinion; since it must be remembered there are no decisive characters by which wounds of the kind referred to can be distinguished, and a medical witness is as likely to be wrong as right in selecting either hypothesis. It is a considerable step in evidence when we are able to assert that a particular wound, found on a dead body, must have been inflicted either during life or immediately after death; for it can scarcely be supposed that, in a case calling for criminal investigation, any one but a murderer would think of inflicting upon a body immediately after death a wound which would assuredly have produced fatal effects had the same person received it while living. So soon as such an opinion can be safely expressed by a witness, circumstantial evidence will often make up for that which may be, medically speaking, a matter of uncertainty. Wounds or Injuries unattended with HcemorrJiage.—The copious effusion of blood has been set down as a well-marked character of a severe wound received during life; but this observation applies chiefly to cuts and stabs. Lacerated and contused wounds of a severe kind are not usually accompanied with much bleeding, even when a large blood A^essel is implicated. It is well known that a whole member has been torn from the living body, and that little blood has been lost; but in such cases coagula, or clots of blood, are commonly found adhering to the separated parts—a character which indicates that the wound was inflicted either during life or soon after death, while the blood was warm and fluid. When a lacerated or contused wound involves a highly vascular part, although no large blood-vessel may be implicated, it is liable to cause death by loss of blood. Ecchymosis from Violence.—Contusions and contused wounds are commonly accompanied by a discoloration of the surrounding skin, to which the term ecchymosis (e/cxvcw, to pour out) is applied. This consists essentially in the extravasation or effusion of blood generally from small ruptured vessels, into the surrounding cellular tissue beneath the skin. An ecchymosis is commonly superficial, affecting only the


[251/872 b22652516_0251.jp2]

ECCHYMOSIS FROM VIOLENCE. layers of the skin, and showing itself externally, either immediately or in the com-se of a short time, in the form of a deep blue or livid red patch ; but the effusion may be so deeply seated as not to produce any external discoloration of the skin. Violence inflicted on a living body may not show itself under the form of ecchymosis until after death. A man received several kicks on the lower part of his abdomen, which caused a rupture of the bladder, and death by peritonitis in about thirty-five hours; but there was no ecchymosis in the seat of the blows, i.e. in the pubic and lumbar regions, until after death. Hinze met with a case of suicidal hanging, in which it was observed that ecchymosis appeared in the course of the cord only after death. This is not uncommon. (See Hanging, 'post.) It has been remarked by Devergie that ecchymoses are often concealed on the bodies of the drowned, when first removed from water, owing to the sodden state of the skin; and they may become apparent only after the body has been exposed for some days, when the water has evaporated. A medical jurist must guard against the error of supposing that, when a blow has been inflicted on a living person, it is necessary that the individual who is maltreated should survive for a long period in order that ecchymosis may be produced. Among numerous instances proving the contrary, the case of the Duchesse de Praslin (1847) may be mentioned. This lady, who was assassinated by her husband, was attacked while asleep in bed. The number of wounds on her person (thirty) showed that there had been a mortal struggle, which, how- ever, could not have lasted more than half an hour. Yet, on in- spection, there were the marks of numerous ecchymoses, which had resulted from the violent use of a bruising instrument. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1847, t. 2, p. 377.) Casper considered that ecchymosis required a certain time for its production, and that, if a person died speedily from the effects of violence, no ecchymosis would be found on the body, although the violence might have been of a bruising nature. The case of the Duchesse de Praslin shows that this is not correct, and Casper himself has admitted that ecchymosis may be produced as the result of violence applied to a recently dead body (see Strangulation, post)—a result which is in accordance with other facts mentioned above ; but if ecchymosis can be produced by violence to the recently dead, it is clear that a continuance of active life is not necessary for its production. The following case shows how these facts may be misapplied. A young man was seen to strike one of his companions. The person struck died suddenly. On a post-mortem examination, the mark of a bruise was seen over the sixth and seventh ribs on the right side. About a fortnight before this blow was struck, the deceased had met with an accident—a heavy box fell on his right side, knocked him senseless, and nearly killed him. The question at issue was, whether the ecchymosed mark on the side was owing to the blow struck shortly before the man died, or to the fall of the box upon his body a fortnight previously. It was suggested, on the authority of Casper, that, as the man died soon after the blow was


[252/872 b22652516_0252.jp2]

ECCHYMOSIS IN THE DEAD BODY. 240 struck, the ecchymosis could not have arisen from the blow, but that it was most probably due to the fall of the box a fortnight before. (' Lancet,' 1870, vol. 2, p. 35.) Such a case does not present much difficulty. If the ecchymosed mark was blue or livid, and without any marginal colours, it was probably the result of the blow struck just before death. If the blood is fluid at the time of violence, and the small capillary vessels are torn through—sudden death following—a blow may cause the effusion of blood, and the production of a mark on the skin. The warm liquid blood thus effused will find its way into the cellular tissue, and produce the usual external appearance. If in the case quoted the ecchymosis had been produced a fortnight before, it would have shown some changes of colour at the margin, as described in the next paragraph. When the injury is deep-seated, ecchymosis may appear at a distance from the site of the injury. This is well seen in blows about the hips ; and a blow on the calf of the leg may manifest itself by ecchymosis around and below the knee. The changes which take place in the colour of an ecchymosed spot are worthy of attention, since they may serve to aid the witness in giving an opinion on the probable time at which a contusion has been inflicted. After a time^—commonly in eighteen or twenty-four hours— the blue or livid margin of the spot is observed to become lighter; it acquires a violet tint, and before its final disappearance it passes succes- sively through shades of a green, yellow, and lemon colour. During this time the spot is much increased in extent, but the central portion of the ecchymosis, that part which received the violence, is always darker than the circumference. Contusions on the Dead.—Christison found that blows inflicted on a dead body within two hours after death gave rise to appearances on the skin similar to those which resulted from blows inflicted on a person shortly before death. The hvid discoloration thus produced generally arose from an effusion of the thinnest possible layer of the fluid part of the blood on the outer surface of the true skin, but sometimes also from an effusion of blood into a perceptible stratum of the true skin itself. He likewise found that dark fluid blood might even be effused into the cellular tissue in the seat of the discolorations, so as to blacken or redden the membranous partitions of the cells containing the fat; but this last effusion was never extensive. From this, then, it follows that, by trusting to external appearances only, contusions made soon after death may be easily confounded with those which have been produced by violence shortly before death. If a contusion has been caused some hours before death, there will be swelling of the part, and probably also changes of colour in the ecchymosed patch, in either of which cases there will be no difficulty in forming an opinion. Although ecchymosis, or an appearance similar to it, may be produced on a body after death, the changes in colour are then met with only under pecuhar circum- stances, as where the person is labouring under general dropsy, and the serum effused beneath the skin may lead to the diffusion of the blood. The most satisfactory mark of distinction between the effects of blows on the living and dead body, in the opinion of Christison, is


[253/872 b22652516_0253.jp2]

EFFECT OF BLOWS ON THE DEAD. 241 the following: in a contusion inflicted during life, the ecchymosed portion of cutis (true skin) is generally dark and much discoloured from the infiltration of blood throughout its whole thickness; the skin at the same time is increased in firmness and tenacity. This is not, however, a uniform consequence of a contusion during life; for a blow may cause efiusion of blood beneath the skin without affecting the cutis in the manner stated. The state of the skin here described cannot be produced by a contusion on a dead body; although it is still an open question whether it might not be produced if the contusion were inflicted a few minutes after death. As it is, the value of this sign is some- what hmited: it is not always produced on the living,—it might be possibly produced on the recently dead; so that when it does not exist we must look for other differential marks, and when it does exist we ought to satisfy ourselves that the contusion was not inflicted recently after death. The period at which such injuries cease to resemble each other has not been fixed with any degree of precision; but, as in the case of incised wounds, it would seem that there is Httle danger of confound- ing them, when a contusion has not been infhcted on a dead body until after the disappearance of animal heat and the commencement of rigor mortis. The practical inference from these observations is that discolorations of the skin, caused by blows inflicted soon after death, may be some- times mistaken for marks of violence on the living body. An instance has been communicated to the author in which, for the sake of experi- ment, blows with a stick were inflicted on the recently dead body of a woman, while still warm. The body was afterwards accidentally seen by non-professional persons, who were not aware of the performance of these experiments; and so strong was the impression from the appearances that the deceased had been maltreated during life, that a judicial inquiry was actually instituted, when the circumstances were satisfactorily explained. The fact, therefore, that severe blows after death resemble slight blows during life, is of some importance; there is ecchymosis in each case, and no certain method of distinguishing the one from the other. Is Ecchymosis a necessary result of violence ?—This medico-legal question has often created great difficulty. It has been repeatedly asserted in courts of law that no severe blow could have been inflicted on the body of a person found dead, in consequence of the absence of ecchymosis or other indication of violence on the part struck; but this assertion is entirely opposed to well-ascertained facts. However true the statement may be that severe contusions are commonly followed by ecchymosis, it is open to numerous exceptions; and unless these are known to a practitioner, his evidence may mislead the court. The presence of ecchymosis is commonly presumptive evidence of the infliction of violence, but its absence does not necessarily negative this presumption. It was long since remarked by Portal that the spleen had been found ruptured from blows or falls, without any ecchymosis or abrasion of the


[254/872 b22652516_0254.jp2]

242 ECCHYMOSIS NOT ALWAYS PRODTJCED BY BLOWS. skin appearing in the region struck. This has been also observed in respect to ruptures of the stomach, intestines, and urinary bladder, from violence directly applied to the abdomen.. Portal supposed that the mechanical impulse was simply transferred through the supple parietes (or walls) of the abdomen to the viscera behind, as in the striking of a bladder filled with water. Whether this be the true explanation or not, it is quite certain that the small vessels of the skin often escape rupture from a sudden blow, so that their contents are not effused. A case is reported by Henke, in which a labouring man died some hours after fighting with another, and on an inspection of the body the peritoneum was found extensively inflamed, owing to an escape of the contents of the small intestines, which had been ruptured to a considerable extent. There was, however, no ecchymosis or mark on the skin externally, and the medical inspectors were inclined to affirm, contrary in this case to direct evidence, that no blow could have been struck; but others of greater experience were appealed to, who at once admitted that the laceration of the intestines might have been caused by a blow, even although there was no appearance of violence externally. Watson states that a girl, aged nine, received a smart blow upon the abdomen from a stone. She immediately complained- of great pain; collapse ensued, and she died in twenty-one hours. On inspection there was no mark of injury externally, but the ileum (small intestines) was found ruptured, its contents extravasated, and the peritoneum extensively inflamed. (' On Homicide,' p. 187.) Williamson met with a case in which- a man received a kick on the abdomen from a horse: he died in thirty hours from peritonitis. The ileum; was found to have been torn completely across in its lower third. There was not the slightest trace of ecchymosis externally—a fact which is the more remarkable since the blow was here struck by a somewhat angular or pointed body, the hoof of a horse. (' Med. Gaz.,' May, 1840. See also ' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1865i p; 286;) A man who had been run over by an omnibus was brought into hospital. The wheel had gone over his chest and abdomen, but on admission no injury was discoverable. On the second day peri- tonitis set in, from which he rapidly sank. The Hver and the small intestines were found ruptured. ('Guy's Hosp. Gaz.,' 1873). Many other cases might be adduced in support of the statement that ecchy- mosis is not a necessary or constant result of a severe blow or severe bruising violence ; but these sufficiently establish the fact. This medico- legal question frequently arises in cases in which the bladder or liver is ruptured, as, owing to the general absence of marks of violence, it is often alleged in defence that no blow or kick could have been inflicted on this part of the abdomen. It is unnecessary to say that this view is not in accordance with facts. (See Ruptures of the heart, liver, spine, and intestines, post.) ^


[255/872 b22652516_0255.jp2]

EVIDENCE OF THE USE OF A WEAPON. CHAPTER 24. EVIDENCE OP THE USE OF A WEAPON.—CHARACTERS OP WOUNDS CAUSED BY WEAPONS.—INCISED, PUNCTURED, LACERATED, AND CONTUSED WOUNDS.— STABS AND CUTS.—WHAT ARE WEAPONS ?—EXAMINATION OF THE DRESS.— IMPUTED OR SELF-INFLICTED WOUNDS. Evidence of the Use of a Weapon.—It is not necessary to prove that a weapon has been used for the production of a wound, for the words of the statute are: ' Whosoever shall, by any means whatsoever, wound or cause any grievous bodily harm to a person,' etc.; yet evidence of the use of a weapon in cases of assault may materially affect the amount of punishment awarded on conviction. When, upon the clearest evidence, it is certain that a weapon has been used, it is not unusual for prisoners to declare that no weapon was employed by them, but that the wound had been occasioned by accidental circumstances. A witness should remem- ber that he is seldom in a position to swear that a particular weapon produced at a trial must have been used by the prisoner: he is only justified in saying that the wound was caused either by it or by one similar to it. {Rfg. v. Ooodale, Norwich Aut. Ass., 1885.) Schworer relates the following case. A man was stabbed by another in the face, and a knife with the blade entire was brought forward as circumstantial evidence against him, the surgeon having stated that the wound had been caused by this knife. The wounded person recovered; but a year afterwards an abscess formed in his face, and the broken point of the real weapon was discharged from it. The wound could not, therefore, have been produced by the knife which was brought forward as evidence against the prisoner at the trial. ('Lehre von dem Eindermorde.') Although the criminality of an act is not affected by an occurrence of this kind, it is advisable that such mistakes should be avoided by the use of proper caution on the part of a witness. (On this question, see the case of Benaud, by Boys de Loury, 'Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1839, t. 11, p. 170. As to what is a weapon, see Henke, ' Zeitschrift der S. A.,' 1844, vol. 1, p. 67.) Characters of Wounds produced hy Weapons.—Let us now suppose that no weapon is discovered, and that the opinion of a witness is to be founded only on an examination of a wound: It is right for him to know that, on all criminal trials, considerable importance is attached by the law to the fact of a wound having been caused by the use of a weapon ; since this generally implies malice, and in most cases a greater desire to injure the party assailed than the mere employment of manual force. Some wounds, such as cuts and stabs, at once indicate that they must have been produced by weapons. 1. Incised Wounds.—In incised wounds, the sharpness of the instru- ment may be inferred from the cleanness and regularity with which the edges are cut; in stabs, also; the form and depth of a wound will often indicate the kind of weapon employed. Stabs sometimes have


[256/872 b22652516_0256.jp2]

INCISED AND PUNCTURED WOUNDS. 244 the characters of incised punctures, one or both extremities of the wound being cleanly cut, according to whether the weapon is single or double-edged. Dupuytren has remarked that such stabs, owing to the elasticity of the skin, are apparently smaller than the weapon—a point to be remembered in instituting a comparison between the size of a wound and the instrument. A lateral motion of the weapon may, how- ever, cause a considerable enlargement of the wound. (See case ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1847, t. 1, p. 400.) When a stab has traversed the body, the aperture of entrance is commonly larger than that of exit; and its edges, contrary to what might be supposed, are sometimes everted, owing to the rapid withdrawal of the instrument. That facts of this kind should be available as evidence, it is necessary that the body should be seen soon after the infliction of a wound, and before there has been any interference with it. In general, wounds made by glass or earthenware are characterized by their great irregularity and the unevenness of their edges. In Beg. V. Ankers (Warwick Lent Ass., 1845), a clean cut as from a pen- knife, about two inches long and one deep, was proved to have existed on the person of the wounded man, who had fallen during a quarrel with the prisoner. Some broken crockery was lying near the spot, and it was alleged in the defence that a fall upon this had caused the wound. This allegation was quite inconsistent with the clean and even appear- ance of the edges of the wound. The prisoner, in whose possession a penknife had been found, was convicted. 2. Punctured Wounds.—It is necessary to notice whether the edges of a punctured wound are lacerated and irregular, or incised; because it may be alleged, in defence, that the wound was produced by a fall on some substance capable of causing an injury somewhat resembling it. In a case that occurred to Watson, a deeply-penetrating wound on the genital organs of the deceased, which had evidently caused the woman's death, was ascribed, by the prisoners charged with the murder, to her having fallen on some broken glass; but it was proved that the edges of the wound were bounded everywhere by clean incisions, which rendered this defence inconsistent, if not impossible. A similar defence has been made on other occasions, where the cases came to trial. In general, wounds made by glass or earthenware are characterized by their great irregularity and the unevenness of their edges, with portions of the substance in them. Cases of this kind show that, as it is not always possible to know when this sort of defence may be raised, a medical witness should never fail to make a minute examination of a wound which is suspected to have been criminally inflicted. These medical difficulties are now for the most part removed by the 24 & 25 Vict., c. 100. This must not, however, lead the witness to suppose that a personal injury is not to be carefully examined with a view to the determination of this question. 3. Lacerated and Contused Wounds.—Lacerated wounds do not in general present greater difficulty with regard to their origin than those which are incised or punctured. The means which produced the laceration are commonly well indicated by the. appearance of the


[257/872 b22652516_0257.jp2]

LACERATED AND CONTUSED WOUNDS. 245 wound. These injuries are generally the result of accident; they are, however, frequently met with on the bodies of new-born children, in which case they may give rise to a charge of infancticide. If it could be proved that they had arisen from the use of a weapon, and that the weapon fitted the wounds, these facts would, of course, go far to a con- viction on a charge of murder. In the case of Montgomery (Omagh Sum. Ass., 1873), it was proved that a bill-hook, found buried in a spot to which the prisoner was seen to go, fitted the injuries produced on the skull of the deceased, and this piece of evidence served to connect the prisoner and the weapon with the act of murder, which took place in a dwelling-house. (See p. 269, post.) Contused wounds and severe contusions present much greater diffi- culty to a medical jurist. It is not often in his power to say whether a contused wound has resulted from the use of a weapon, from a blow of the fist, or a fall, by reason of the deceased having accidentally fallen against some hard surface. The question is frequently put to medical witnesses on those trials for manslaughter which arise out of the pugilistic combats of half-drunken men. One of the combatants is generally killed, either by a blow on the head, by a fall, or by both kinds of violence combined. The skull may or may not be fractured; and the person may die of concussion, inflammation of the brain, or from effusion of blood. The general defence is that the deceased struck his head against some hard substance in falling on the ground, and a surgeon is asked whether the particular appearances might not be explained on the supposition of a fall. A medical witness is rarely in a position to swear with certainty that a contused wound of the head must have been produced by a weapon and not by a fall. {Reg. v. Budd, Kingston Lent Ass., 1868.) Some circumstances, however, may occa- sionally enable him to form an opinion on this point. If there are contused wounds on several parts of the head, with copious effusion of blood beneath the skin, the presumption is that a weapon must have been used. If the marks of violence are on the summit of the head, it is highly probable that they have been caused by a weapon, since this is not commonly a part which can receive injury from a fall. So again, if sand, gravel, grass, or other substances be found in a con- tused wound, this will render it highly probable that the injury was really caused by a fall. It matters not, under the statute on wounding, whether the wound was produced directly by a weapon employed by an assailant, or indirectly by any act of violence on his part. A man may fracture the skull of another, either by striking him with a brick, or by striking him with his fist and thus causing him to fall against a brick. Acquittals formerly took place upon technicahties of this kind (' Law Times,' March 21, 1846, p. 501); but in Beg. v. Dodd (Shrewsbury Sum. Ass., 1853) Coleridge, J., expressed a strong opinion against the distinction thus made. The prisoner, it was alleged, threw a stone at the deceased, who immediately fell on a stone floor. The deceased was able to go about for several days, but he died, a week after he had sustained the violence, from inflammation of the brain, as a result of


[258/872 b22652516_0258.jp2]

246 INJURIES FROM BLOWS OR FALLS. fracture of the skull. The medical witness ascribed the fracture to a hlow from a stone. In the defence, it was urged that the fracture might just as well have arisen from a fall on a stone floor. Coleridge, J., held, if the prisoner knocked the deceased down, that it would make no difference whether the deceased died from a fall on a stone floor or from an injury produced by the stone which was thrown at him. A doubt may arise whether a weapon has or has not been used in reference to lacerated or contused wounds. Contused wounds on bony surfaces, as on the head {e.g., the wound inflicted by the blow of a cricket-ball), sometimes present the appearance of incised wounds, the skin being evenly separated. When a wound is recent, a careful exami- nation will generally enable a witness to form a correct opinion, but if some time has elapsed before a wound is examined, great caution will be required in forming a judgment. In 1853, Hancock was enabled by the careful examination of a wound to disprove a charge of maliciously wounding made against innocent persons. A little girl was represented to have received, while sitting over an iron grating, a wound in the pudendum, by some persons pushing a toasting-fork, or other pointed instrument, between the bars of the grating from below. There were no marks of punctures, which would have been found had this statement been true, but a slight laceration of the parts, such as might have been produced by an accidental fall on the edge of the iron grating while the girl was in a sitting position. There were also marks of bruises on the thigh, such as might have occurred from an accident of this kind. The mother of the child had made a false charge for the sake of exciting pubHc com- passion and extorting money. A surgical examination of the injury clearly estabhshed that it had resulted from accident. The part of the body in which the injury existed in this case is not usually ex- posed to laceration or punctures from accident; but the child, for a necessary purpose, had placed herself voluntarily in this position, and had, on her own admission, slipped, and thus probably injured herself. A surgeon should be cautious in listening to the statement of others, that a weapon has been used, unless the wound itself bears about it such characters as to leave the fact indisputable. During a scuffle, the person assaulted may be easily deceived as to the way in which an accused person inflicted a wound upon him ; and a bad motive may sometimes exist for imputing to an assailant the use of a weapon during a quarrel. In such cases a medical witness should rather trust to the appearance of the wound for proof of the use of a weapon, than to any account given by interested parties. A judge suggested to the author that some means of discrimination between the effects of falls and blows affecting the same part of the body would greatly aid the administration of justice. There is no doubt that it would, but as no two cases coming under this class of injuries are precisely alike, either in the part wounded or the amount of force employed, it is scarcely possible to introduce general rules or to make statistics practically available. It is commonly supposed that a mere fall is not sufficient to produce the same degree of injury


[259/872 b22652516_0259.jp2]

247 INJURIES PROM BLOWS OR FALLS. that may be caused by a blunt weapon applied suddenly to the head by human force; but a severe fracture may arise from a simple acci- dent of this kind, and present nearly all the characters of homicidal violence. The difficulties at criminal trials will be found to proceed, not so much from want of rules to assign the violence to one condition or the other, as from a want of observation when the wounds are first examined. If minute attention were given to an examination of these injuries soon after their occurrence, circumstances would be noticed which would help the medical witness to a conclusion. The defence that they might have been produced by a fall is not set up until a sub- sequent period, and the surgeon is then obliged to trust to his memory for the main points of distinction. Such improvised opinions usually fail in impressing a jury. When it is a question which of two weapons produced certain bruised wounds found on the head, the difficulties of medical evidence are increased. Under these circumstances, the presence of blood, hair, cotton, or woollen fibres on one of the weapons, may render it probable that this weapon was used. {Reg. v. Lee, Exeter Ass., Feb. 1885.) In most instances an accurate observation of the form of a contused wound, and an early comparison of it with the alleged weapon, or the substance said to have produced it, will enable a witness to come to a correct conclusion on the subject. The situation, depth, and shape of the wound may be such that no accidental fall could reasonably account for its production. In assaults on women, it is not unusual to find that the complainant herself endeavours to exculpate the assailant by ascribing the marks of violence, not to blows, but to some accidental fall. A woman deposed before a magistrate that certain severe injuries which she had sustained had been caused by her falling on a fender. The medical man who examined her found on the top of the head three distinct wounds, which were bleeding. Two appeared as if they had been caused by a blunt instrument; the third, on the back of the head, was a clean-cut wound. He considered that they had been pro- duced by a chopper, and that none of them had been caused by a fall or a series of falls. The prisoner, on this evidence, was committed for trial. If the fall has taken place from a great height, as over a precipitous or rugged slope, it is obvious that the body may sustain many severe injuries to various parts quite sufficient to account for death. Such a fall may be the result of accident, of suicide, or, as in the case of Madame de Tourville, in July 1876, of a deliberate design to destroy life by pushing the person over the precipice. The injuries would be similar in each case. Be Tourville, a barrister, was charged before the Austrian Court at Botzen with the murder of his wife by pushing her over a precipice in the Stelvio Pass. Her lifeless body was found at a considerable depth below. The chief seat of injury was the head, which had been crushed by the fall. There was nothing in the appearance of the body to show intentional violence. The guilt of the prisoner was made out by the false and inconsistent statements which he had made respecting the occurrence. There were marks of the body


[260/872 b22652516_0260.jp2]

248 STABS AND CUTS. WEAPONS. DRESS. having been dragged some distance, and part of the dress, in a bloody state, was found at a distance from the spot where the body was lying, and there were marks of blood on the prisoner's hands and dress. After a lengthy trial, during which the spot was visited by the judge and jury, De Tourville was found guilty and sentenced to death. This sentence was subsequently commuted to imprisonment for hfe. 4. Stabs and Cuts.—It has been remarked that the law in some cases attaches great importance to the clear proof of the use of a weapon; and a medical man has therefore a certain responsibility thrown upon him when, in the absence of a weapon and the denial of its use, he is called upon to say whether one has or has not been used. In reference to cuts and stabs, there can in general be no difiSculty, for these injuries carry with them distinct evidence of their mode of production. Formerly stabbing and cutting were treated as distinct from wounding, and very nice legal distinctions were drawn between these terms, which had the effect of procuring acquittals on mere legal technicalities. Under the consolidated Act, the words ' stab ' and cut' are properly omitted, and the word' wound' only has been retained. Medical men would always agree upon a stab or cut being a wound, but they might reasonably differ upon the question whether in a given case a wound was really a stab or a cut. It might be punctured, lacerated, or contused, and not fairly come under the professional description either of a cut or a stab. A medical witness has now only to prove that the personal injury falls strictly within the meaning of the term wound (p. 234) ; he is not called upon to prove the precise variety of wounding to which the injury should be assigned. At the same time, he should always be prepared with a full description of the characters of an injury in case questions on the subject should be put to him. What are Weapons ?—The consohdated statute has removed those legal subtleties which raised doubts on the true significance of the term weapon. Thus the teeth, the uncovered hands or feet, were formerly held by the judges not to be weapons ; and injuries produced by them, however severe, were not treated as wounds within the meaning of statute. Persons were tried on charges of biting ofi' fingers and noses, and although the medical evidence proved that wounds of a severe kind had been inflicted, and that great disfigurement and mischief had been done to individuals, yet the nature of the injury produced was not so much regarded as the actual method by which it was accomplished. The persons charged were acquitted under an indictment for 'wounding,' since wounds, in a legal sense, could be produced only by weapons, while the teeth, hands, and feet were not weapons in law. Examination of the Dress.—This is sometimes a most important part of the duty of a medical man. In a case of severe wounding, of what- ever kind, he should always require to see the dress of the wounded person. It may throw a material light upon the mode in which a wound has been produced; it may remove an erroneous suspicion of murder, and may sometimes serve to indicate that a wound has been self-


[261/872 b22652516_0261.jp2]

EXAMINATION OF THE DRESS. 249 inflicted, for the concealment of other crimes, or falsely to impute its infliction to other persons. Marks of blood, dirt, grass, or other sub- stances on the clothing may also throw a light upon the mode of inflic- tion. So again the use of a weapon, in reference to cuts and stabs, may be inferred from the dress presenting corresponding cuts or per- forations. Contused wounds by bludgeons may, however, be readily produced through the dress, without tearing or injuring it. Consider- able laceration of the skin and muscles, and even severe fractures, may be caused without necessarily penetrating the dress, supposing this to be at all of an elastic or yielding nature. In self-inflicted or imputed cuts or stabs, there is often a want of correspondence between the perforations of the dress and the wounds on the person: this is one of the characters by which the con'ectness of a statement may be tested. A severe wound may be indirectly produced by a bruising weapon, and medical witnesses have been often questioned on this point. Thus the prosecutor may at the time have worn about his person some article of dress which received the blow, and this may have actually caused the wound. Cases of this kind must be determined by the circumstances which accompany them. Hence it is obvious that a medical practitioner should always make a minute and careful examination of wounds which are likely to become the subject of criminal charges, as well as of the dress and clothing worn by the wounded person at the time of the assault. In performing his duties as a surgeon, he is bound, so far as he consistently can, to notice as a medical jurist the characters of all personal injuries, so as to be able to give an opinion on the mode in which they were produced. A careful examination of the dress has served to remove doubts respecting the mode in which contused wounds have been inflicted on the body of a person found dead; while, on the other hand, a neglect to examine the dress had led to accidental being mistaken for homicidal violence, as in the following case. A woman was found dead in bed. She had vomited slightly, and there was on the floor a small quantity of blood, which had flowed from the nose. She had been seen in her usual health on the previous night. There were found two indentations about the middle of the right parietal bone, and there was a large clot of blood in this situation beneath the skin. On removing this clot, the bone was found fractured to the extent of four inches. Nearly three ounces of clotted blood were found on the outer membrane of the brain (dura mater), between it and the skull. All the other viscera were healthy. This was the only injury, and quite sufficient to account for death; but a question arose respecting the mode in which this fracture was caused. It was in evidence that, on the evening before her death, the deceased had been knocked down, while she was walking in a public road, by a man accidentally running against her. One witness stated that she fell heavily on the back of her head, on which at the time she wore a bonnet. She appeared stunned—was raised up by the man—some brandy was given to her, and she recovered sufficiently to walk home and eat her supper as usual, after which no one saw her until she was found dead in bed on the following morning. Some suspicion arose that the violence done


[262/872 b22652516_0262.jp2]

EXAMINATION OF THE DRESS. 250 to the head was too great to be accounted for by a mere fall, and it was a question whether, with such an amount of injury, the deceased could have walked to her home, at the distance of a mile and a half, and have eaten her supper before going to bed. At first it was thought that this was a case of murder, and a man who lodged in the house with the deceased was suspected. His room was searched, and a hammer with two claws was found. On comparing these claws with the two indentations and fracture, the medical witness thought that this weapon would account for their production. The deceased and this man had been in the habit of quarrelHng, and they were the only persons in the house on this occasion. The lodger said that he let the woman in about 9 p;m. (the faM in the road occurred about 7.30 p.m.); her appearance presented nothing unusual, and he saw no more of her until called at seven the next morning, when she was found dead and cold. It was only at the adjourned inquest that the bonnet worn by the deceased at the time of the fall was called for by the coroner. Two indentations were then found upon the back part of it, correspond- ing to those on the skull of deceased. The indentations on the bonnet contained dust and dirt, thereby confirming the statements of the witnesses, and rendering it probable that the fall in the road had really caused the fatal injury to the head. The examination of the dress in this case cleared up what might have been otherwise doubtful. It is probable that the large internal effusion of blood which had caused death did not take place until the deceased had reached home, and perhaps as a result of the exertion made. She must have died very soon after she went to bed, as her body was found cold at seven o'clock the next morning. In addition to the caution which this case conveys respecting medical opinions on the origin of wounds, it shows that persons may walk far, and die at a great distance from the spot where a serious injury to the head has -been sustained. If several wounds have been inflicted through the dress, an examina- tion of this may sometimes suffice to show which was first received. A man, in struggling with an assailant, received three stabs with a knife—two on the left elbow and a third in the back. The latter was at about the level of the eighth rib; it was vertical to the chest and had clean edges. The lower margin was obtuse—the upper acute; hence it was evident that the cutting edge of the weapon had been directed upwards. It had traversed the left lung and the heart, and had caused immediate death. It was obvious, on examination, that this mortal wound had been first received, and the stabs at the elbow inflicted subsequently. These two stabs, which were slight, had divided the cloth coat and shirt, and had only grazed the skin, so that no blood had been effused. But the edge of the cuts in the cloth coat and shirt were stained with blood ; hence it was evident that they must have been produced by a weapon already rendered bloody by a previous wound. The fact was of importance in the case, and the correctness of the medical opinion was confirmed by the evidence at the judicial inquiry. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1847, p. 461.) Imputed or Self-injikted Wounds.—A man may produce upon him-


[263/872 b22652516_0263.jp2]

SELF-INFLICTED WOUNDS. 251 self one or more wounds for the purpose of simulating a homicidal assault, which he may allege to have been committed upon him. With the motives for the self-infliction of -wounds a medical jurist is not concerned—it is of the fact only that he can take cognizance. From cases that have occurred, it appears that the object has been to extort money, to conceal murder, robbery, or some other crime, and to turn away a suspicion of criminality from the wounded person himself; but it is not always easy to trace a motive for the self-infliction of injuries, and when a reasonable motive is not at once forthcoming, persons are apt to be misled and to credit the story. Persons who have been con- victed of thus imputing violence to others have frequently borne good characters until the occurrence; and this has contributed to give support to their statements. When a person, intending to commit suicide, fails in the attempt, he has sometimes, under a sense of shame, attributed the infliction of a wound in his throat to another; but facts of this kind ma.y without difficulty be cleared up by circumstantial evidence. Imputed wounds—if we except the case of an actual attempt at suicide, in which the injury is commonly severe—are generally of a superficial character, consisting of cuts or incisions not extending 'below the true skin; deep stabs are seldom resorted to where the purpose is not suicide, but merely to conceal other crimes. Further, these wounds are in frord of the person, and may be on the left or right side, accord- ing to whether the person is right or left handed. They have also been generally numerous, and widely scattered ; sometimes they have had a complete parallelism, unlike those which must have been inflicted by an adversary during a mortal conflict with a weapon. The hands are seldom wounded, although in the resistance to real homicidal attempts these parts commonly sufffer most severely. The injuries are not usually situated over those parts of the body in which wounds are by common repute considered mortal, and there is in general an entire want of correspondence between the situation of the wounds on the person, and the cuts or other marks on the dress. This is a fact which requires special attention. In comparing cuts on the dress with wounds on the person, there are several circumstances to be attended to. What articles of dress were worn at the time of the assault ? In a case of actual stabbing by another, all ought to present marks of perforation, corresponding in direction, form, size, sharpness of the edges of the weapon, etc. In imputed wounds, the marks on several layers of dress may not corre- spond with each other in the characters above mentioned. It is diffi- cult for a man simulating such injuries so to arrange his clothes when off his person as to deceive a careful examiner. There will be some inconsistency or want of adjustment. Apart from the fact that several stabs or cuts cannot exist on the same part of the clothes without one or more being stained with blood from the outside or inside, an impostor may either do too much or too little, and thus lead to his detection. In a case which excited much public discussion in London many years since, a simple circumstance led to the inference that certain stabs or cuts through a shirt had not been produced while the shirt was on, but


[264/872 b22652516_0264.jp2]

252 CHARACTERS OF IMPUTED WOUNDS. while it was off the body. There were two cuts in the shirt near to each other, precisely similar in size, form, and direction; in fact, the knife or dagger producing them must have gone through a fold of the shirt, so accurate was the correspondence. Then, however, it followed that the shirt could not have been upon the body of the wounded person, as he alleged, because a stab through the shirt when worn over the skin must, in order to reach the body, traverse not only a fold (producing two cuts), but a single layer in contact with the skin, and thus produce three cuts, or, in the event of traversing two folds, cuts. In simulating the wounds by cuts on the shirt, the person is supposed to have forgotten this, and have merely stabbed a fold of the shirt while lying on a table, or in some situation convenient for the purpose. This, among other facts, rendered it probable that the slight wounds on the chest were self-inflicted. A case occurred at Notting- ham, in 1872, which shows how persons who inflict wounds, and at the same time cut the dress covering the wounded part, may furnish evidence against themselves. A youth charged a man with unlawfully wounding him on the highway. He stated that the man had stabbed him in the arm, cutting through his shirt and coat-sleeve. There was no attempt at robbery, and no motive for such an act. On examining the coat and shirt-sleeve it was found that they had been cut, but there was no corresponding cut in the lining of the coat-sleeve. The prose- cutor could give no explanation of this. It was clear that the charge was false, that there had been no cutting or stabbing by another, but that the wound was self-inflicted when the coat was not worn. The youth wished to leave the place where he had been sent for private study, and he had adopted this plan to induce his friends to remove him. It has been contended that no rules can be laid down for the detec- tion of such cases; each must be decided by the facts which accom- pany it. The facts which a medical man must endeavour to ascertain are the following:—1. The relative positions of the assailant and the assailed person at the time of the alleged attack. 2. The situation, direction, and depth of the wound or wounds. 3. The situation or direction of marks of blood or wounds on the person or dress of either, or of both the assailant and assailed. 4. The marks of blood, and the quantity efl'used at the spot where the mortal struggle is alleged to have taken place. The importance of these inquiries cannot be over- estimated. A strong suspicion was raised against the then Duke of Cumberland, in 1810, in reference to the death of Sellis, when a skilful examination of the wounds on the deceased would have shown that they might have been self-inflicted. It is worthy of remark that imputed wounds are generally cuts or stahs. They are seldom of the contused kind; the impostor cannot, in reference to contusions, so easily calculate upon the amount of mis- chief which is likely to ensue. Bergeret, however, has related some cases in which females labouring under hysterical attacks have inflicted upon themselves severe contusions, and have charged innocent persons with attempts to murder. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1863, t. 1, p. 463.) In


[265/872 b22652516_0265.jp2]

CHARACTERS OF IMPUTED WOUNDS. general the inconsistency of the story is so palpable as to betray the imposture at once ; but much prejudice is often unjustly excited against those who have been falsely accused. Slight excoriations or bruises may be magnified into marks of murderous violence ; and if a medical man can be found to admit in an unqualified form that a severe blow may be inflicted and yet leave but slight marks on the skin, the charge will be considered proved against the unfortunate accused. The case of M. Armand, a merchant of Montpellier, who was tried at the assizes at Aix, in March, 1864, for an alleged murderous assault upon his servant Maurice Roux, furnishes a good illustration of the readiness with which the most inconsistent stories are accepted by the public, when they are supported by pseudo-medical evidence. This case was rather one of imputed homicidal strangulation than self-inflicted wounding; nevertheless, a foundation was laid for medical opinions by the presence, as it was alleged, of a slight excoriation of the skin on the nape of the neck. The injury was so slight that it escaped the observation of some medical men who examined the complainant, and there could be no doubt from the facts that it had been produced, either accidentally or designedly, by the complainant on himself. Several medical gentlemen, taking the man's story as true, asserted without any qualification: 1. That a blow on the nape of the neck might produce cerebral concussion and syncope. 2. That a blow to produce such effects need not be violent. 3. That such a blow so inflicted would not always leave upon the skin marks of contusion or ecchymosis. These admissions were taken by the court to support the man's story—that his master had struck a severe blow on the back of his neck, that this blow had produced concussion of the brain, and that he had been rendered insensible for many hours. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1864, t. 1, p. 451.) The evidence for the defence, and chiefly that given by Tardieu, removed the evil effect produced by such loose medical statements as these, and satisfied the jury that the story of the com- plainant was a pure fabrication. The accused was justly acquitted of the charge. Although it has been elsewhere stated that severe blows are not always attended with external marks of violence (p. 241), it by no means follows that such blows have been struck in all cases in which the skin presents a shght abrasion. This would be converting the exception into the rule, and every superficial injury might be thus distorted into a proof of the infliction of murderous violence. Pistol-shot wounds are sometimes voluntarily inflicted for the pur- pose of imputing murder or extorting charity. A man intending to commit suicide by firearms, and failing in the attempt, may, from shame and a desire to conceal his act, attribute the wound to the hand of some assassin. In examining such imputed wounds, they will not be found to involve vital parts, except in cases of attempted suicide; and they will possess all the characters of near wounds produced by gunpowder, wadding, or a bullet. The skin around will be more or less lacerated and bruised; there will be much ecchymosis, and the • hand holding the weapon, as well as the dress and the wounded skin, may be blackened or burnt by the exploded gunpowder. A pistol-shot


[266/872 b22652516_0266.jp2]

254 WOUNDS INDICATIVE OF HOMICIDE. wound from an assassin may be produced from a distance, while an imputed wound which is inflicted by a person on himself must always partake of the characters of a near wound. CHAPTER 25. WOUNDS INDICATIVE OF HOMICIDE, SUICIDE, OE ACCIDENT.—EVIDENCE PROM THE SITUATION OF A WOUND.—EVIDENCE FROM ITS NATURE AND EXTENT. —EVIDENCE FROM THE DIRECTION OP A WOUND.—WOUNDS INFLICTED BY THE RIGHT OE LEFT HAND.—SEVERAL WOUNDS.—USE OP SEVERAL WEAPONS. Wounds indicative of Homicide, Suicide, or Accident.—Supposing that the wound which is found on a dead body is proved to have been caused before death, it may be necessary to inquire whether it was the result of suicide, homicide, or accident. It might at first sight be considered that the determination of a question of this nature was wholly out of the province of a medical jurist. In some instances it may be so, and the settlement of it is then properly left to the legal authorities; but, in a large number of cases, it is so closely dependent for its elucidation on medical facts and opinions, that juries could never arrive at a satisfactory decision without medical evidence. Let us suppose, then, that a medical jurist is consulted in a doubtful case: what are the points to which he should direct his attention ? They are, with regard to the wound, (1) its situation, (2) its nature and extent, and (3) its direction. 1. Evidence from the Situation of a Wound.—It is-a general prin- ciple, in which most medical jurists agree, that wounds inflicted by a suicide are usually confined to the fore or lateral parts of the body. The throat and chest are commonly selected when cutting instruments are employed; while the chest, especially in the region of the heart, the mouth, the orbit, and the tfemples, are the spots generally chosen for the perpetration of suicide by firearms. But it is obvious that any of these parts may be also selected by a murderer, with the especial design of simulating a suicidal attempt; therefore the mere situation of a wound does not suffice to establish the fact of suicide. Some have regarded it as fully established in legal medicine, that, when wounds exist at the back part of the body, it is a positive proof that they have not been self-inflicted. This situation is certainly unusual in cases of suicide ; but, as Orfila observes, it is not the situation, so much as the direction of a wound, which here furnishes evidence against the pre- sumption of suicide. A wound, traversing the body from behind to before in a direct line, is not likely to have resulted from a suicidal attempt: at least it must be obvious that it would require more pre- paration and contrivance on the part of a self-murderer so as to arrange matters that such a wound should be produced than we can believe him to possess at the moment of attempting his life. Besides, his


[267/872 b22652516_0267.jp2]

WOUNDS. EVIDENCE FROM SITUATION. object is to destroy himself as quickly and as surely as circumstances will permit; he is, therefore, not likely to adopt complicated and uncertain means for carrying this design into execution. Neverthe- less, we must not always expect to find suicidal wounds in what an anatomist would pronounce to be the most appropriate situation to produce instant destruction. An incised wound in a concealed or not easily accessible part is presumptive of murder, because this kind of injury could have resulted only from a deliberate use of the weapon. Suicidal wounds are, however, sometimes found in unusual situations. Thus the blood-vessels of the arms or legs may be the seat of injury. Abdul Aziz, Sultan of Turkey, was found dead under suspicious circumstances. The arms presented two gashes at the bend of each elbow in front. The direction of both of these wounds was oblique, from above downwards and from within outwards, and their edges were jagged. That on the left arm penetrated to the joint. The superficial veins and the deep-seated tissues were cut through, and the ulnar artery laid open, but not entirely divided. The wound on the right arm was superficial, involving only the skin and the veins. The bleeding from the ulnar artery and veins had led to death. The dress was soaked with blood. A pair of scissors stained with blood was found upon the sofa. Although the situation of these wounds is unusual, there is nothing in them inconsistent with suicide. The body was examined by nineteen physicians, and they agreed in signing a report that the act was suicidal. Unfortunately, they assigned, as one of their reasons, ' that the direction and nature of the wounds, as well as the instrument which might have effected them (the scissors), lead to the conclusion of suicide;' whereas it is perfectly clear from the description that such wounds as these might have been easily produced by an assassin, and that their situation, nature, and direction were very unusual in cases of suicide. In reference to this subject, it has been truly remarked that there is no wound which a suicide is capable of inflicting upon himself which may not be produced by a murderer: but there are many wounds inflicted by a murderer which, from their situation and other circumstances, a suicide would be incapable of producing on his own person. We cannot always obtain certainty in a question of this kind,—the facts will often allow us to speak only with different degrees of probability. See the case of Elizabeth Gib- bons, convicted of the murder of her husband. (See p. 259, post.) The situation of a wound sometimes serves to show whether it is of an accidental nature or not—a point often insisted on in the defence. Accidental wounds are generally found on those parts of the body which are exposed. Some wounds, however, forbid the supposition of accident even when exposed; as deeply-incised wounds of the throat, and gunshot wounds of the mouth and temples. (For the report of a case in which an accidental wound on the head by an axe closely simulated a homicidal wound, see Casper's ' Wochenschrift,' May 24, 1845.) 2. Evidence from the Nature and Extent of a Wound.—Contused wounds are rarely seen in cases of suicide, because in producing them


[268/872 b22652516_0268.jp2]

256 EVIDENCE FROM NATURE AND EXTENT. there is not that certainty of speedily destroying Hfe to which a self- murderer commonly looks. There are, of course, exceptions to this remark; as where, for instance, a man precipitates himself from a considerable height, and is wounded by the fall. Circumstantial evidence will, however, rarel}' fail to clear up a case of this description. Greater difficulty may exist when life is destroyed by a contused wound voluntarily inflicted. When persons labouring under insanity or dehrium commit suicide, they often inflict upon themselves wounds of an extraordinary kind, such as would, at first view, lead to a suspicion that they had been produced by the hand of a murderer; and therefore the rules which are here laid down to distinguish homicidal from suicidal wounds must be guardedly applied to cases of this kind. In 1850, a case occurred at Guy's Hospital, in which a patient in a fit of delirium tore away the whole of the abdominal muscles from the lower and fore part of the abdomen. Had the body of this person been found dead with such an unusual and serious personal injury, it is not improbable that it would have been pro- nounced homicidal, and not suicidal. In 1876, a French artisan was found dead, with a severe wound in his throat. He had weighted a large knife with heavy stones, and had placed it between two upright planks, on the principle of the guillotine. He had so placed his neck that when the knife fell by releasing a string it would cause a fatal wound. In the following case, but for the facts being known, an accidental wound in a concealed part of the body might have been pronounced to be homicidal. A girl, set. 15, while jumping on to the knee of her uncle, received a severe wound under the following circum- stances. He was holding a stick between his legs, and the girl did not observe it. In the act of jumping, this passed up the anus. She withdrew the stick, and, though she complained of pain, she amused herself as usual. On the following night acute symptoms set in, and she died in forty-eight hours, of peritonitis. A rent was found in the fore part of the rectum which had penetrated the peritoneal cavity. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1874, ii. p. 403.) The body of a man was found in a lane near Rhyl. It appeared that the deceased had stretched himself on his back on the ground, unbuttoned and turned back the lower part of his vest on the left side, and had then thrust the long thin blade of a pocket-knife into the heart, between the fifth and sixth ribs. The knife was found on his breast, close to the wound. The body was warm when found. He had not been disturbed; there had been no robbery of his person, his hat remained on his head, and his gloves in his left hand. He had arrived at Rhyl that afternoon. Everything indicated great deliberation. The extent of a wound, by which we are to understand the number and importance of the parts injured, must in these cases be always taken into consideration. It has been somewhat hastily laid down as a rule, that an extensive wound of the throat, involving all the vessels and soft parts of the neck to the spine, could not be self-inflicted. Although, in general, suicidal wounds of this part of the body do not reach far back, or involve the vessels of more than one side,


[269/872 b22652516_0269.jp2]

1 would, of course, be precisely the reverse. Suicidal wounds are, WOUNDS OF THE THROAT. yet we find occasionally that all the soft parts are thus completely divided. These are cases in which, perhaps, with a firm hand, there is a most determined purpose of self-destruction. In a case of suicide, observed by Marc, the weapon had divided all the muscles of the neck, the windpipe, and gullet—had opened the jugular veins and both carotid arteries, and had even grazed the anterior hgaments of the spine. A wound so extensive as this is rarely seen in a case of suicide, but there is no ground for the assertion that such extensive woimds in the throat are incompatible with self-destruction. (See also 'Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1872, t. 1, p. 419.) Incised wounds in the throat are generally set down as presumptive of suicide, but murderers sometimes wound this part for the more effectual concealment of crime. Circumstances connected with the form and direction of a wound may in such cases lead to detection; for, unless the person attacked be asleep or intoxicated, resistance is offered, evidence of which may be obtained by the presence of great irregularity in the wound or the marks of other wounds on the hands and person of the deceased. The peculiar form of a wound on the throat has sometimes led to a justifiable suspicion of homicide. In one instance a man was found dead with his throat cut in the manner in which butchers are accustomed to kill sheep. This led the medical , man to believe that the wound had been inflicted by a butcher. The police, guided by this observation, arrested a butcher, who was subsequently tried and convicted of the murder. In some instances, however, it is extremely difficult to say whether the wound is homicidal or suicidal, the medical facts being equally explicable on either hypothesis. (See case by Marc, ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1830, t. 2, p. 408; another by Devergie, ibid. 414 ;: and a third by Ollivier, ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1836, t. 1, p. 394.) Regularity in a wound of the throat has been I considered to be presumptive of S'licide. This was the publicly- i expressed opinion of Sir Everard Home in the well-known case of Sellis. The deceased was found lying on a bed, with his throat exten- sively cut, and the edges of the incision were regular and even. This \ condition of the wound, it was inferred, repudiated the idea of homi- 1 cide; but, as a general principle, this appears to be a fallacious i criterion. A murderer, by surprising his victim from behind, by I having others at hand to assist him, or by directing his attack against 1 one who is asleep or intoxicated, or who from age or infirmity is in- capable of offering resistance, may easily produce a regular and clean incision on the throat. 3. Evidence from the Direction of a Wound.—The direction of a : wound has been considered by some to affOrd presumptive evidence eufBciently strong to guide a medical jurist in his inquiry. It has ! been remarked that in most suicidal wounds which affect the throat, i; the direction of the cut is commonly from left to right, either trans- i versely or passing obliquely from above downwards; in suicidal stabs i and punctured wounds the direction is commonly from right to left I and from above downwards. In left-handed persons, the direction


[270/872 b22652516_0270.jp2]

258 EVIDENCE FROM THE DIRECTION OF A WOUND. however, subject to such variation in extent and direction that it is scarcely possible to generalize with respect to them. Nevertheless, an attention to these points may sometimes be of real assistance to the inquirer, especially when the body has not been removed from its position. It is recommended that the instrument with which the wound has been inflicted should be placed in either hand of the deceased and the arm moved towards the wounded part, so that it may be clearly seen whether the direction of the wound could or could not correspond to it in any position. It might happen that neither arm would reach the wounded part, so as to inflict a wound of the particular direction observed: this may be the case in wounds situated on the back. It is obvious that if a murderer makes an incised wound in the front of the throat frOm behind, the direction may be the same as that commonly observed in cases of suicide. (See on this point the case of Reg. v. Dalmas, C. C. C, May, 1844.) Again, if the person attacked is powerless, the wound may be deliberately made, so as to simulate a suicidal act; indeed, murderers seldom attack the throat except with the design of simulating an act of suicide. A homicidal stab may also take the same direction as one which is suicidal, but this wound would be confined to those cases in which the assailant was placed behind or aside. If in front of the person whom he attacks, the direction would probably be from left to right; but in suicide, when the right hand is commonly used, it is the reverse. Oblique wounds, passing from above downwards, are common to homi- cide and suicide, but those which take an oblique course from below upwards are generally indicative of homicide, for it is extremely rare that a person bent on suicide, unless a lunatic, thus uses a weapon. Homicidal incisions, especially in the throat, are often prolonged below and behind the skin forming the angles of a wound, deeply into the soft parts. Those which are suicidal rarely possess this character; they terminate gradually in a sharp angle, and the skin itself is the furthest point wounded; the weapon is not carried either behind, below, or beneath it. Suicides may graze the ligaments in front of the spinal column, but that they should make deep incisions into the bones, cut off hard iDony processes, and divide the intervertebral substance and the vertebral arteries, is a proposition contrary to all experience and probability. The case of the Earl of Essex, who was found dead in the Tower in 1683, bore somewhat on these points. The deceased was discovered with his throat cut, and a razor lying near him. This razor was found to be much notched, while the throat was smoothly and evenly cut from one side to the other and to the vertebral column. Some considered this to have been an act of suicide, others of murder. Those medical witnesses who supported the view of suicide were asked to explain how it was that such an even wound could have been pro- duced by a notched razor. They attempted to account for this by asserting that the deceased had probably drawn the razor backwards and forwards across the neck-bone ; forgetting that before this could have been done by the deceased, all the great vessels of the neck must have been divided. Exceptions to these characters of homicidal and


[271/872 b22652516_0271.jp2]

WOUNDS. SUICIDE OR ACCIDENT? 2^g' suicidal wounds may exist; but in a dark and intricate subject of this nature we have only limited rules to guide us. The instrument with which a wound is supposed to have been inflicted should be adapted to the edges of the incision, its sharpness compared with the clean- ness and evenness of the cut, and its length with the depth of the incision or stab. It is no uncommon occurrence for a murderer to substitute some instrument, belonging to the deceased or another person, for that which he has actually employed; and this by its size, shape, bluntness, or other peculiarities, may not account for the appearances presented by the wound. It is not often that any difficulty is experienced in distinguishing a suicidal from an accidental wound. When a wound has really been suicidally inflicted, there are generally to be found about it clear in- dications of design; and the whole of the circumstances are seldom reconcilable with the supposition of accident. But if the position of the deceased with respect to surrounding objects has been disturbed ; if the weapon has been removed, and the body carried to a distance; then it will not always be easy to distinguish a wound accidentally received from one inflicted by a suicide or a murderer. The evidence of those who find the body can alone clear up the case; and the medical witness may be required to state how far this evidence is consistent with the situation, extent, and direction of the wound found on the deceased. In the case of the Uxbridge murder {Beg, V. Elizabeth Gibbons, C. C. C, Dec. 1884), the situation and direction of four gunshot wounds on the deceased man were all-important considerations; and from a careful consideration of these Bowlby was enabled to arrive at a conclusion adverse to suicide. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1885, i. p. 62.) Circumstantial evidence is com- monly sufficient to show whether a wound has been accidentally received or not; but as an accidental wound may sometimes resemble one of homicidal or suicidal origin, so it follows that it is not always possible for a medical jurist to decide the question peremptorily from a mere inspection of the wound. It would not be difficult to produce instances in which murderers have aUeged, in defence, that the wounds observed on the bodies of their victims were of accidental origin, and the allegations have been clearly refuted by medical evidence. A witness must be prepared, therefore, in all cases in which death has taken place in secrecy, and the nature of the wound is such as to render its origin doubtful, to be closely examined by counsel for a prisoner charged with felonious homicide, on a question whether the wound might not have been accidental. The law requires that it should be made clear to a jury, before such a charge can be sustained, that the fatal wound could not have had an accidental or suicidal origin. The subject of wounds of the neck has been examined in relation to homicide, suicide, and other medico-legal questions, by Giiterbock. (' Vierteljahrsschr. f. Gerichtl. Med.,' 1873, 2, p. 1.) Wounds infiicted by the Right or Left Hand.—Some remarks have been made in reference to the direction of a cut or stab varying


[272/872 b22652516_0272.jp2]

26o SUICIDE OR HOMICIDE ? SES^ERAL WOUNDS. according to whether the right or the left hand has been used by a suicide. It is necessary for a medical jurist to be aware that there are many persons who are ambidextrous, i.e. who have equal facility in the use of the right and the left hands. This may not be generally known to the friends of the deceased; and such persons are often pronounced, even by those who have associated with them, to have been right-handed. A want of attention to this point is said to have been one of the circumstances which led to a suspicion of murder in the case of SeJlis. (Wills's ' Circ. Evid.,' p. 97.) The man was found dead on his bed with his throat cut; the razor was discovered on the left side of the bed, whereas it was generally supposed and asserted that he was right- handed. The truth was, he was equally expert in the use of the razor with his left and right hands ; and thus the apparently suspicious circumstance of the razor being found on his left side was at once explained away. The importance of making due allowance for the characters presented by wounds in the throat is also illustrated by a case which occurred in London in 1865. A publican and his wife had been frequently in the habit of quarrelling. One night the wife gave an alarm, and the man was found dead on the bed, with his throat severely cut. On examination, the fatal wound had all the characters of a left-handed cut, while the deceased was generally believed to be right-handed; and there was bloody water in a wash-hand basin in the room. The wife, who had marks of bruises upon her, said that she left her husband in the bedroom for a short time, and on her return found him dead.. The suspicious facts were explained at the inquest by a daughter of the deceased by a former marriage. She stated that her father had been brought up as a wood-carver, a trade which requires a man to use both hands equally well; that he had frequently threatened to destroy himself; and that the blood in the wash-hand basin was owing to her having washed her hands after she had touched her father's head. This satisfactorily explained the medical circumstance, which appeared at first to point to an act of homicide. The Presence of Several Wounds.—In suicides, except in cases of cut-throat, commonly one wound only is seen, namely, that which has destroyed life, and the presence of several wounds on the body, or the marks of several attempts around the principal wound, have been con- sidered to furnish presumptive evidence of murder. But any inferences of this kind must be cautiously drawn, since not only ma}'- a murderer destroy his victim by one wound, but a suicide may inflict many, or leave the marks of several attempts before he succeeds in his purpose. Ogston, sen., has- pointed out (' Lect. on Med. Jurispr.,' p. 424) that in suicidal cut-throat the principal wound is often associated with small tentative incisions, near and parallel to this; but that in homicidal incised wounds of the throat the tentative cuts, if present^ do not preserve the same parallelism—obviously because the victim does not remain passive under the attack of his assailant; and thus the relative positions ot tne assailant and the assailed are continually changed. Ogston, jun., describes a case in which a man was supposed to have


[273/872 b22652516_0273.jp2]

SUICIDE OR HOMICIDE ? SEVERAL WEAPONS. '261 committed suicide by cutting his throat and chest, finishing by drown- ing himself. The superficial cuts in this case might easily have given rise to a suspicion of murder, had not moral circumstances led the examiner to conclude that the case was one of suicide. (' Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' 1885, i. p. 689.) The Use of Several Weapons.—In general, suicides when foiled in a first attempt continue to use the same weapon; but sometimes, after having made a severe wound in the throat, they will shoot themselves, or adopt some other method of self-destruction. These cases can only appear complicg-ted to those who are unacquainted with the facts relative to self-murder. Neither the presence of several wounds by the same kind of weapon, nor of diiferent wounds by different weapons, can be considered of itself to furnish any proof of the act having been homicidal. In one instance, a lunatic, in committing suicide, inflicted thirty wounds upon his head. In a case of murder, when many wounds are found on a dead body, it may happen that the situation or direction of some will be incompatible with the idea of a suicidal origin. Thus a stab or cut may be close to a contusion or contused wound, and although a fall or other accident might account for the latter, the former would indicate violence separately inflicted. Two or More Mortal Wounds.—When we find several wounds on the body of a suicide, it generally happens that one only bears about it a mortal character, namely, that which has caused death. On this account it has been asserted by some medical jurists that, when two mortal wounds are found upon the body, and particularly if one of them is of a stunning or stupefying tendency {i.e. affecting the head), they must be considered incompatible with suicide. An inference of this kind can be applied to those cases only in which the two wounds, existing on different parts of the body, were likely to prove immediately fatal. It must, however, be borne in mind that all suicides do not immediately perish from wounds which are commonly termed mortal; on the contrary, they have often the power to perform acts of volition and locomotion, which might by some be deemed wholly incompatible with their condition. It is difficult to say whether one wound is likely to destroy life so rapidly as to render it impossible for the person to have inflicted another upon himself; but when there are several distinct incisions on the throat, each involving important blood-vessels, there is good reason to infer that they have resulted from an act of murder. Wounds produced simultaneously or at different times.—When several wounds are found on a dead body, the question is frequently asked, Which was first received f If one is what is commonly termed mortal, and the others not, it is probable that the latter were first inflicted. This remark appHes both to cases of homicide and suicide; but it is apparent that when, in a murderous assault, a person has been attacked by several assailants at once, the wounds ma}'' have been simultaneously produced. This is, however, a question to which it is not easy to give a specific answer. Each case must be decided from the special circumstances attending it; and in most instances, unless some direct evidence is forthcoming, a medical opinion can be little


[274/872 b22652516_0274.jp2]

WOUNDS. EVIDENCE FROM CIRCUMSTANCES. 262 more than conjectural. It is a question almost always put in a court of law; and a witness should at least prepare himself to meet it by a proper examination of the medical circumstances of the case. CHAPTER 26. EVIDENCE FROM CIRCUMSTANCES.—THE POSITION OF THE BODY—OF THE WEAPON.—EVIDENCE FROM BLOOD, HAIR, AND OTHER SUBSTANCES ON WEAPONS. —MARKS OF BLOOD ON CLOTHING AND FURNITURE, ON THE DECEASED, AND ON THE ASSAILANT. Evidence from Circumstances.—In pursuing the examination of the question respecting the homicidal or suicidal origin of wounds, the attention of the reader may be called to the force of evidence which is sometimes derived from the circumstances under which the body of a person, dead from wounds, is discovered. It may be said that this is a subject wholly foreign to the duties of a medical jurist, but we cannot agree to this statement. There are few in the profession who, when summoned to aid justice, by their science, in the detection of crime, do not seek for circumstances by which to support the medical evidence required of them. A practitioner would certainly be wrong to base his professional opinion on these circumstances, but it is scarcely possible for him to avoid drawing an inference from them as they fall under his observation. Care must be taken that this inference is not over- strained. The medical evidence may be of itself weak, and insufiScient to support a charge against the accused; in such a case, if any suspicious circumstances have come to his knowledge, the witness may be often unconsciously induced to attach greater importance to the medical facts than he is justified in doing. In short, he may, through a feeling of prejudice, which it is not always easy to avoid, give an undue force to the medical evidence. But if a proper degree of caution is used in drawing inferences, and the circumstances are not allowed to create a prejudice in his mind against the accused, a medical man is bound to observe and record them; for, being commonly the first person called to the deceased, many facts capable of throwing an important fight on the cause of death would remain unnoticed or unknown but for his attention to them. The position of a dead body, the suddenness of death, the discovery of a deadly poison, the distance at which a knife or pistol is found, the position of the instrument—whether situated to the right or left of the deceased—the marks of blood or wounds about the person, or of blood on the clothes or furniture of the apartment, are facts which must assist materially in developing the real nature of a case, and in giving force to a medical opinion. Many of these circum- stances can fall under the notice of him only who is first called to the deceased; and, indeed, if observed by another, no advantage could be taken of them, except from the interpretation of a medical man. At the same time, a person may have died suddenly, and a weapon


[275/872 b22652516_0275.jp2]

EVIDENCE FROM CIRCUMSTANCES. 263 or poison be found near the body, and yet the death may have taken place from natural causes. Due allowance must be made for coinci- dences of this kind. The purchase and possession of a deadly poison shortly before a sudden death may create suspicion, but an analysis may show that there is no poison in the body, and further that the post-mortem appearances are consistent with natural disease, and, unless treated as exceptional in character, they are not consistent with death from poison. A woman was found dead under very suspicious circumstances. Within half an hour of her death she had sent a boy to a shop to purchase a packet of Battle's vermin-killer (strychnine). He gave it to her and left the house. When he returned at the time mentioned, he found her leaning on the table, speechless and motion- less. She was then dead. There was no rigidity and no evidence of convulsions. Some fluid was found in the stomach, but in this there was no strychnine, and none of the blue colouring matter which had been sold with the powder. No trace of the powder could be found on the premises, and no cup, glass, or vessel in which the poison might have been mixed, could be seen. ('Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1865, i. p. 34.) The absence of any characteristic symptoms, and the non- detection of the poison and its colouring ingredient under the circum- stances, negatived the suspicion of poisoning. The purchase, possession, and the non-discovery of the purchased packet after the death of the woman, were circumstances which created suspicion, but nothing more. The state of the lungs and heart was sufficient to account for sudden death. Among the questions which present themselves on these occasions are the following:—Is the position of a wounded body that which a suicide could have assumed ? Is the distance of a weapon from the body such as to render it improbable that it could have been placed there by the deceased ? In answering either of these questions, it is necessary to take into consideration the extent of the wound, and the time at which it probably proved fatal. Again, it may be inquired, Has the deceased bled in more places than one ? Are the streams of blood all connected ? Are there any marks of blood on his person or clothes which he could not well have produced himself ? Are there any projecting nails, or other articles, which might account for wounds on the body as the result of accident? These are questions, the answers to which may materially affect the case: hence, a practitioner, in noticing and recording the circumstances involved in them, ought to exercise due caution. The rules for investigating a case of alleged death from violence have been elsewhere described (p. 6, ante). Among the additional circum- stances to which a medical witness should specially direct his attention on these occasions are the following:— 1. The Position of the Body.—The body may be found in a position which the deceased could not have assumed on the supposition of the wound or injury having been accidental or suicidal. The position of a dead wounded body is often only compatible with homicidal inter- ference, either at the time of death or immediately afterwards. In


[276/872 b22652516_0276.jp2]

264 WOUNDS. POSITION OF THE BODY AND OF THE WEAPON. order to determine the probable time of death, we should always notice whether there is any warmth about the body—whether it is rigid, or in a state of decomposition, and to what degree this may have advanced. 2. Tht Position of the Weapon.—If a person has died from an acci- dental or self-inflicted wound, likely to cause death either immediately or within a few minutes, the weapon is commonly found either near to the body or within a short distance of it. If found near, it is proper to notice on which side of the body it is lying; if at a short distance, we must consider whether it might have fallen to the spot, or have been thrown or placed there by the deceased. If there have been any inter- ference with the body, evidence from the relative position of it and the weapon will be inadmissible. In a case which was referred to the author some years since, a woman had evidently died from a severe wound in the throat, which was homicidally inflicted; the weapon, a razor, was found under the left shoulder, a most unusual situation, but which, it appears, it had taken owing to the body having been carelessly turned over before it was seen by the surgeon who was first called. It is compatible with suicide that a weapon may be found at some distance, or in a concealed situation; but it is much more frequently either grasped in the hand, or lying by the side of the deceased. In one instance it is stated the deceased was discovered in bed with his throat cut, the razor being closed or shut by his side. In another case, the bloody razor, closed, was found in the deceased's pocket. There is, however, one circumstance in relation to the weapon which is strongly confirmatory of suicide. If the instrument is firmly grasped in the hand of the deceased, no better circumstantial evidence of suicide can be offered. It is so common to find knives, razors, and pistols grasped in the hands of suicides, that it is quite unnecessary to produce cases illustrative of this statement. The grasping of a weapon appears to be owing to muscular spasm persisting after death, and manifesting itself under the form of what has been called cadaveric spasm—a condition, in the opinion of the author, quite distinct from rigidity, although often running into it (see pp. 40, 41, ante). It does not seem possible that any murderer could imitate this state, since the relaxed hand of a dead person cannot be made to grasp or retain a weapon, like the hand which has firmly held it by powerful muscular contraction at the last moment of life. Experiments performed by Hofmann (' Med. Leg.,' trad, par Brouardel, p. 601) completely confirm this statement. By a variety of artificial contrivances—the use of ligatures, etc.—attempts were made to cause the hand of a recently dead body to hold a weapon firmly as if by a voluntary contraction of the muscles during life ; but these attempts utterly failed to produce any such results. Although the fingers were kept completely closed on the object, it was simply held, and not grasped, falling from the hand immediately on the release of the pressure. In reference to the weapon being found at a distance from the body,


[277/872 b22652516_0277.jp2]

BLOOD AND HAIR ON WEAPONS. 265 all the circumstances of the case should be taken into consideration before any opinion is expressed. If the weapon cannot be discovered, or it is found concealed in a distant place, this is strongly presumptive of homicide, provided the wound is of such a nature as to prove speedily fatal. If found near the body, it will be well to notice whether the weapon is sharp or blunt, straight or bent, also whether the edge is or is not notched. These circumstances may throw a light on the question of suicide or murder. 3. Blood on Weapons..—The weapon with which a wound has been inflicted is not necessarily covered witla blood. The popular view is, that if much blood is found about a dead body, the weapon ought always to be more or less bloody. In reference to heavy blunt instru- ments applied with force to the head, severe contusions and fractures may be produced without immediate effusion of blood. Unless the bludgeon is used in a subsequent struggle, or handled by a bloody hand, no blood whatever may be found on the end which produced the injuries. In reference to stabs, the knife is frequently without any stains of blood upon it, or there is only a slight film, which, on drying, gives to the surface a yellowish-brown colour. The explanation of these facts appears to be that in a rapid blow or phinge the vessels are compressed, so that bleeding takes place only after the sudden with- drawal, when the pressure is removed. Even if blood should be effused, the weapon, in being withdrawn, is sometimes cleanly wiped against the edges of the wound, owing to the elasticity of the skin. Tlius the first stab through the dress may not present any appear- ance of blood on the outside, but in a second stab, with the same weapon, the outside of the dress should present a bloody mark, unless the weapon had previously been wiped (p. 250). The blood may have been removed by washing, from the blade of a knife or dagger; hence the handle and inner portions, the dirt accumulated between the handle and blade, the notch for opening the blade, and the indentations of any letters stamped upon it, should be closely examined with the microscope. The blood on a weapon may be wet or dry, in a partly coagulated state, or diffused as a mere yellowish-red film. If coagulated, this would render it probable that the blood had issued from the body of a living person or animal, or from a body recently dead. But the blood of a dead animal dried in small spots on the blade of a knife may sometimes present a similar appearance, and thus lead to a mistake in evidence. 4. Hair and other Substances on Weapons.—In some instances no blood may exist on a weapon, but a few hairs or fibres may be found adhering to it if the weapon is of a bruising or cutting kind. The main questions may be, in such a case, whether the hair is that of a human being or of an animal, and whether the fibres correspond in their nature, form, and colour to articles of dress on the deceased or the accused. Before any coagulated blood is removed from a weapon, it should be examined carefully with a powerful lens. Hairs or fibres of linen, woollen, silk, or cotton may be found imbedded in


[278/872 b22652516_0278.jp2]

BLOOD ON CLOTHING OR FURNITURE. the solidified blood, either on the edge or on the blade; and evidence of this kind may occasionally be of great importance. In a case of murder by manual strangulation, so much violence had been employed by pressure with the fingers, that not only was a quantity of blood efiused, but portions of cuticle with the fine downy hairs of the neck of deceased had been removed. The blood with the abraded cuticle and some hairs were found upon a towel which was traced to the assailant. (' Vierteljahrsschr. f. Gerichtl. Med.,' 1873, 2, p. 112.) On a trial for murder in Ireland, in 1877, it was proved that there were hairs firmly clenched in the hands of deceased; and when these were compared with a like number of the prisoner's hair, they were found to correspond. Foreign substances are sometimes found in contused and lacerated wounds, which may throw a light on the mode in which they were inflicted. In gunshot-wounds it is not unusual to find portions of paper or other substances, used as wadding for the gun or pistol. The pre- servation of articles of this description, or portions of the projectiles found under these circumstances, has proved a means of fixing the crime upon the guilty person. When a gun or pistol is discharged near to the body, a portion of the wadding- is generally carried into the large irregular wound produced. In a case of stabbing, a portion of the weapon may be found in the wound. 5. Marks of Blood on Clothing or Farniture.—It is proper to notice all marks of blood on the clothes of the deceased or in the apartment, and to observe where the greatest quantity of blood has been effused; this is generally found on the spot where the deceased has died. The deceased m^ay have bled in more places than one; if so, it should be noticed whether there is any communication in blood between these different places. Blood on distant clothes or furniture may show whether the deceased has moved about, and whether he has struggled much after receiving the fatal wound. Acts of locomotion by a wounded person who has died from loss of blood, or by a criminal whose hands and feet are bloody, are generall}'' indicated by tracks or marks of blood. {Reg. v. Oarry^ Lincoln Spring Ass., 1883.) The observation of these marks, if made at the time that a dead body is found, is of great importance. They may be so situated as to show that the body of the deceased has been moved or been interfered with after death, and thus throw a light upon the question whether the act has been one of homicide or of suicide. In reference to clothing, it is advisable, if it be possible, to have some clear proof that the clothes sent for examination were actually worn by the accused or belonged to the deceased. Serious mistakes are sometimes made, and medical opinions should therefore be expressed with caution. It should be noticed on these occasions whether the blood is deposited in large patches on clothing, or whether it is sprinkled, and also whether it is in large or small quantity. The sprinkling may have proceeded from a wounded artery, or from a splashing of blood as a result of continued violence. It should likewise be observed whether, if the wound is in the throat or chest, blood has flowed down in front of the clothes or


[279/872 b22652516_0279.jp2]

MAKKS OF BLOOD ON THE DEAD BODY. 267 person, or whether it has flowed so as to collect in the armpits or on each side of the neck ; for these appearances will sometimes show that the wound was inflicted when the person was standing, sitting, or lying down. If the throat is cut while the person is lying down, it is obvious that the blood will be found chiefly on one or other side of the neck, and not extending down the front of the body. Few suicides cut the throat while in a recumbent posture, and the course which the blood has taken may, therefore, be sometimes rendered subservient to the dis- tinction of a homicidal from a suicidal wound. The position in which the body was when a wound was inflicted is a frequent question at inquests and criminal trials. When spots of blood are found upon articles of dress or furniture, their form and direction may occasionally serve to furnish an indica- tion of the position of the wounded person with respect to them. Thus, if the form of a spot is oval and elongated, the presumption is that the person was placed obliquely with respect to the stained furni- ture during the haemorrhage. (' Ann. d'Hj^g.,' 1840, p. 397.) The force with which the blood has been thrown out will be in some measure indicated by the degree of obhquity and length of the spot. This is in general wide and rounded at the upper part, but narrow and pointed below. 6. Marks of Blood or Violence on the Dead Body.—In examining a dead body, attention should be paid to the state of the mouth and throat. Assailants who make their attack during sleep sometimes endeavour to close the mouth, or to compress the throat, so as to pre- vent an alarm being given. In one instance there were the marks of finger-nails around the mouth; in another, ecchymosed impressions, as if produced by a hand, were found upon th^e throat of the deceased. The hands of a dead person should always be examined; many recent cuts, excoriations, or incisions found upon them, especially if on the back of the fingers or thumbs, will indicate that there has been a mortal struggle with the assailant. In the inspection, the examination of the stomach should not be omitted. The presence or absence of food, mucus, or blood, may furnish evidence of considerable importance in the elucidation of the case. All marks or stains of blood or dirt on a dead body require special observation. The impression of a hand, or of some of the fingers, may be found on the skin in a situation where it would have been improbable or impossible for the deceased to have produced it, even supposing that one or both of his hands were covered with blood. In one case of murder there was found the bloody im- pression of a left hand upon the back of the left hand of the deceased, in such a position that it was quite impossible the deceased himself could have made the mark. In all cases it should be noticed whether the inside or outside of the hand, or whether one or both hands, are stained with blood, and the size and position of the stains should be described. Marks of blood on the dress of a wounded person or a dead body may often furnish important circumstantial evidence. If there are several stabs or cuts on the body involving the dress, it should be observed whether the edges of one or more of them are stained with blood, as if


[280/872 b22652516_0280.jp2]

BLOOD ON THE ASSAILANT. 268 from the wiping of a weapon, and whether the stain is on the outside or inside of the article of dress. In simulated personal injuries, the stain of blood may be, through inadvertence, applied to the outside of the dress—a fact which might, in some instances, lead to the detection of the imposture. (See case ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1847, t. 2, p. 219.) 7. Marks of Blood on the Assailant.—It is a very common idea that no person can commit a murder in which blood is effused, without having his person and clothes more or less covered with blood. Nothing can be more erroneous. On several occasions we have been required to examine articles of clothing which have been worn by persons sub- sequently convicted of murder by wounding, and either no blood has been found on any part of the dress, or only small spots wholly out of proportion to the quantity of blood which must have flowed from the deceased, {Hec/. v. Harrington, Chelmsford Ass., 1852; Beg. v. Flack, Ipswich Ass., 1853; Beg. v. Gass, Carlisle Ass., 1860; Beg. v. Bow- lands, Beaumaris Ass., 1861; Beg. v. Edmonds, Swansea Ass., 1862; Beg. V. Garry, Lincoln Spring Ass., 1883; Beg. v. Shrimpton, Wor- cester Ass., May, 1885; h'eg. v. Ooodale, Norwich Ass., Nov. 1885.) In the case of Gardner (C. C. C, 1862), in which there had been a large effusion of blood from a severe wound in the throat, no blood- stains were found on the clothing of the man who was convicted of the murder. Policemen are frequently misled in searching for criminals by looking for blood on clothing, as a necessary accompaniment of an act of murder. This also leads them to magnify stains of red ■ paint, iron rust, and fruit-stains on the dress of an accused person into marks of blood. {Reg. v. Moore, Maidstone Sum. Ass., 1872.) It is obvious that the throat of a person while standing, sitting, or kneeling, may be cut by a murderer from behind, and thus in appear- ance simulate suicide. Under these circumstances the clothes of the assassin would escape being stained with blood. The flowing or spurt- ing of blood upon the clothes of the assailant will depend upon his position in relation to the deceased at the time of inflicting the wound, and this must always be a matter of pure speculation. In entire viola- tion of this simple principle, the fact of a prisoner's clothes not being marked with blood has been on more than one occasion urged as a proof of his innocence. {Beg. v. Dalmas, C. C. C, June, 1844.) In this case the counsel for the prisoner wished to impress the jury that no person could cut the throat of another without having his clothes covered with blood; and as there was not proved to be any blood on his clothes, the prisoner could not have been guilty of the crime. The facts were simply that the throat of the woman was cut while she was walking across Battersea Bridge, the prisoner having inflicted the wound from behind. Another circumstance to be noticed is that the accused may have had time to change his clothes in spite of the supposed vigilance of the police. This has occurred in several trials for murder. {Bf^g. v. Heath, Bucks Lent Ass., 1854; Beg. v. Cuss, Cumberland Ass., 1860.) In one case the trousers taken from the prisoner soon after the murder presented no marks of blood; but the trousers actually worn by him


[281/872 b22652516_0281.jp2]

NO MARKS OF BLOOD FOUND ON THE ASSAILANT. 269 were found with blood upon them pending the trial. In other instances, the prisoner may have had time to remove any stains by washing. {Reg. V. Ooodale, Norwich Ass., Nov. 1885.) Owing to this erroneous assumption that where much blood has been lost by the deceased, the assassin's clothes could not have escaped being ' deluged' with blood, juries have been led to return verdicts of acquittal in cases in which, although no blood-stains were found, the circumstances proved were consistent only with the theory of murder. On the trial of Suh-Inspector Montgomery for the murder of Mr. Glasse (Omagh Ass., July, 1873), the absence of blood-stains on the clothing of the prisoner was alleged to be a strong proof of his innocence of the crime. In this case the contused wounds on the head of the deceased were produced by a bill-hook. There was blood on the floor around the body, but much of this had, no doubt, flowed from the wounds after death. The wounds were not likely to have been attended with a great spurting of blood or any copious effusion at the time of their infliction, yet it was assumed that such murder could not have been perpetrated without the clothes of the assassin being ' covered ' with blood. As the evidence against the accused was entirely circum- stantial, much stress was laid upon the state of the clothes as a proof of his innocence. The prisoner had been previously tried twice for the crime, and the juries were not able to agree, chiefly owing to the fact that there was no blood upon his clothes. On the third trial he was convicted, and the conviction was immediately afterwards justified by an admission of his guilt. He admitted that he had removed the blood-stains from his clothes with cold water soon after the perpetration of the crime. A case like this is surely sufficient to show the danger of trusting to such a fallacious criterion as a proof of innocence. The counsel who defended Courvoisier for the murder of Lord William Kussell {Reg. v. Courvoisier, C. C. C, 1840) contended, in the strongest terms, that the accused could not have perpetrated the crime because there were no marks of blood on any of his clothes, and no bloody weapon was found in his possession or in the house. As all the vessels of the throat of the deceased had been cut to the vertebral column while he was lying asleep, it was alleged to be impossible that the assassin could have escaped from the spurting of blood from the large vessels. After his conviction, the prisoner admitted that when he committed the murder at night he wore no clothes, but was in a state of nudity, and that all he did was to wash his hands. The weapon which he employed was the carving-knife of the house; this he washed and returned to the tray with the other knives. A similar defence was raised in Reg. v. Thompson (Durham Wint. Ass., 1863), in which the prisoner was charged with the murder of his wife, by cutting her throat with a razor. According to the medical evidence, the wound in the woman's throat was five inches in length, and in a direction from left to right, extending from the angle of the left jaw to an inch behind the right ear, dividing all the blood-vessels and nerves of the throat. The medical witness properly stated that such a wound could not have been self-inflicted. It proved rapidly fatal.


[282/872 b22652516_0282.jp2]

27Q EXAMINATION OF BLOOD-STATNS. No razor or other weapon that could have produced the wound was found near the body. The prisoner stated that the wounds had been produced on herself by deceased during a struggle. No blood was found on the prisoner's clothing, and on this fact the counsel for the defence mainly relied to show that this was not an act of murder, but of self-destruction. The man was convicted, and the case here quoted proved that the defence was based on a pure fallacy. (' Times' of Dec. 17, 1873.) The presence of spots of blood on articles of clothing, knives, etc., taken from the persons of those who are accused of murder, may be quite consistent with innocence. Small spots or stains have often an undue importance attached to them. We have known minute spots of blood on the shirt of a man tried for murder by wounding regarded as furnishing proof of criminality, until it was explained that they were probably derived from flea-bites, and that some were on one side and some on the other side, showing that the shirt had been worn on the two sides. The coarse clothing worn by labourers may acquire blood- spots from a variety of accidental circumstances, which the accused may not always be able to explain. When he knows the stains are there, and manifests great anxiety to give some explanation of their presence, as by falsely stating that he had assisted in kilHng a pig, a rabbit, or that he was carrying game about him, there may be strong ground for suspicion; but a medical practitioner should always make due allowance for the accidental presence of blood on the clothes of working men. In a case of suicide, in 1872, by cutting the throat, the son, who first discovered his father lying dead, imaging that he had broken a blood- vessel. The son lifted up the body, and then went for assistance. In this way his hands and clothes became bloody. At the inquest he was closely questioned on this point. There could not be the least doubt that the act was one of suicide, and that the clothes of the son had become accidentally covered with blood in the manner in which he had stated. CHAPTER 27. EXAMINATION OF BLOOD-STAINS. — CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. — SPECTEOSCOPIC EXAMINATION.—BLOOD-CRYSTALS.—MICROSCOPICAL EVIDENCE.—BLOOD OP MAN AND ANIMALS.— STAINS OF BLOOD ON LINEN AND OTHER STUFFS.— AGE OR DATE OF THE STAINS.—OTHER STAINS RESEMBLING BLOOD.—BLOOD ON WEAPONS.—ARTERIAL AND VENOUS BLOOD.—VARIETIES OF BLOOD. Examination of Bloodstains.—It may appear at first sight an easy matter to say whether certain suspected spots or stains on articles of clothing, furniture, or weapons are or are not owing to blood ; but in practice great difficulty is often experienced in answering the question. If the stains are large and recent, most persons may be able to form an opinion; but the physical characters of blood are soon changed, even


[283/872 b22652516_0283.jp2]

CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF BLOOD-STAINS. 271 when the stuff is white and otherwise favourable for an examination. If the stains, whether recent or of old standing, are upon dark-dyed woollen stuffs, as blue, black, or brown cloth, or if they appear in the form of small or detached spots, or in thin films on dark clothing or rusty weapons, no one but a competent medical man should be allowed to give an opinion. Chemical Analysis.—There is no direct chemical process by which blood can be identified, but we presumptively establish its nature by determining the presence and properties of the red colouring matter, or hcemoglobin. The chemical properties of the red colouring matter of blood are as follows:—1. It readily dissolves in cold water, forming, if recent, a bright-red solution. 2. The red colour of this solution is not changed to a crimson or a green tint by a few drops of a weak solution of ammonia. If the ammonia be concentrated, or added in large quantity, the red liquid will acquire a brownish tint. 3. The red liquid when boiled is coagulated—the colour is entirely destroyed, and a muddy-brown flocculent precipitate is formed, the quantity of which will depend on the quantities of colouring matter and of albumen present. The red colouring matter of blood is always more or less mixed with albumen, and it is this substance which gives to a dried blood-stain on linen or cloth a well-marked stiffness, and a glossy surface. Stains from cochineal and the red colours of wine, flowers,: and fruit, are dull, and do not cause any stiffening of the fibre of the stained stuff, nor any appearance under the microscope at all resembling a dried coagulum of blood. 4. A solution of the red colouring matter of blood in water produces, with freshly made tincture of guaiacum, a reddish-white precipitate of the resin. On adding to this an ethereal solution of peroxide of hydrogen, a beautiful blue colour is more or less rapidly brought out. If a sufficient quantity of alcohol or ether be added, the precipitate will be dissolved, and a deep sapphire-blue solution will result. Cochineal and other red colouring matters, when thus treated, give a reddish colour to the resin of the tincture of guaiacum, and undergo no change on the addition of peroxide of hydrogen. They are thus well marked and distinguished from the red colour of blood. Whether the blood is new or old, whether concentrated or much diluted, this test produces the blue coloration. It produces: the change better in a diluted than in a concentrated state. A drop of blood diffused through six ounces of water may be thus detected in one or two drachms of the mixture. It is to be noted that the blue colour is produced by blood-pigment only with the mixture of guaiacum and peroxide of hydrogen; the production of a blue colour mth guaiacum alone is valueless as a test for blood. In all cases it must first be ascertained that tincture of guaiacum alone is not coloured, and then that it becomes coloured on the subsequent addition of peroxide of hydrogen. Tincture of guaiacum is coloured blue by milk, pus, saliva, and by many mineral compounds. Such are the chemical properties of blood, whether taken from the human body or from that of any warm red-blooded animal (Mammaha). Of the various red colouring matters extracted from vegetable and


[284/872 b22652516_0284.jp2]

272 SPECTROSCOPIC EXAMINATION. animarsubstances, there are none which to the experienced eye present the pecuhar crimson-red tint of blood, especially when the substance is examined in a good light with a low power of the microscope. When solutions of these red colouring matters are treated with ammonia, some, such as cochineal, logwood, and the colours of roots and woods, acquire a deep crimson tint; while others, such as the colouring matter of the rose, and the red colours of flowers and fruits, are changed to a blue or green. The red colours are not destroyed by a boiling temperature, and, even when mixed with albumen, this substance is simply coagu- lated, while the red colouring matter remains unchanged. In the case of blood, the effect of heat is to destroy the colour entirely. When these pigments are found upon linen and similar stuffs, they present under the microscope the appearance of a uniform stain or dye, unlike blood in colour. There is no glossy coagulum to be seen, and the stained stuff is not stiffened as it is by the serum of dried blood. Spectral Analysis.—Spectral analysis applied to blood has been made the subject of evidence on various trials for murder. The great advan- tage of this optical method is that it admits of the examination of blood without in any way interfering with the subsequent application of the chemical tests already described. We simply analyse the light as it traverses a clear solution of the red colouring matter, and, with a proper spectral eye-piece attached to a microscope, we notice whether the coloured spectrum has undergone any change. If the red liquid owes its colour to recent or oxidized blood, two dark absorption-bands will be seen breaking the continuity of the coloured spectrum. These are situated respectively near the junction of the yellow with the green, and in the middle of the green. If the blood is quite recent and of a bright-red colour (oxyhaemoglobin), the two absorption-bands are distinct and well defined. A good light, either artificial or day- light, is required; the coloured liquid should be clear and of sufficient intensity, and the spectral apparatus properly adjusted. The blood sufficiently diluted should be placed in a glass tube for the purpose of examination. The spectral eye-piece allows of two of these tubes being examined at once, and it is desirable to have a specimen of blood mounted, for comparing the actual spectrum of blood with that of the suspected liquid. The results are the same with the red blood of all animals. In the course of an hour in warm weather, and after a day or two in cold weather, the blood in the tube undergoes a remarkable change. It loses its scarlet, and acquires a purple colour (reduced haemoglobin). In passing to this state it has become deoxidized, and the colouring matter is now called deoxidized haemoglobin. A small quantity of sulphide of ammonium—or an ammoniacal solution of ferrous tartrate, made by dissolving ferrous sulphate in water, adding a sufficiency of tartrate of potassium, and then making alkaline with ammonia (Stokes's solution)—added to red blood, will produce the same effect more rapidly. In this state the two bands appear blended, and one broad dark absorption-band is seen nearly in the same situation. That the blood is really deoxidized is proved by the fact that, on adding to that


[285/872 b22652516_0285.jp2]

BLOOD. SPECTRAL ANALYSIS. ^73 which has spontaneously changed from red to purple a few drops of peroxide of hydrogen, the blood is re-oxidized, and again acquires its red colour, with the manifestation of the two absorption-bands. The same result takes place if the purple blood is put into a wider tube and well shaken with air. The presence of two bands, with this power of conversion and reconversion by deoxidizing and oxidizing agents, is characteristic of red blood. Blood which has been kept shows one or more bands in the red, due to a new body, methcBmaglohin. When the blood by long exposure to the air has undergone chemical changes, it ceases to give any well-defined absorption-bands. If a solution containing haemoglobin is acidified with a vegetable acid, the pigment is destroyed, a hcematin, a brown-red pigment, is produced. The same change is effected by prolonged exposure to air. If the acid solution of hsematin be made alkaline with ammonia, and Stokes's solution (p. 272) be added, two fine dark bands of hsemochromogen (reduced hsematin) make their appearance. These are more towards the blue end of the spectrum than the two bands of oxyhsemoglobin. A recent blood-stain, however minute, may be made to yield succes- sively the bands of oxyhsemoglobin, of reduced haemoglobin, and of haemochromogen. There can be no doubt that, in the hands of a competent person, and one skilled in micro-spectral observations, this optical method will enable him to discover the minutest trace of blood, provided any red colouring matter remains. Thus Sorby states that a spot of blood only one-tenth of an inch in diameter, or a quantity of the red colouring matter amounting to no more than the 1000th part of a grain, was sufficient to give conclusive evidence of its presence by spectral analysis. J. G. Richardson states that by a still more delicate process he has been able to detect the 3000th part of a grain of blood on an axe-handle supposed to have been used in a case of murder. Sorby detected blood in the form of deoxidized haematin on the rusty blade of a knife with which a murder was committed in 1862, after the lapse of ten years. Blood-stains which have been washed in water, and blood which has been even boiled or heated to 212° F., may be thus detected. In the latter case ammonia, with the aid of a gentle heat, should be employed to dissolve the matters rendered insoluble by boiling. Spectral analysis does not enable us to make any distinction beyond that of recent and old blood, and this distinction cannot be so drawn as to enable us to fix a specific or even an approximate date. Certain accidental conditions may rapidly produce on blood the same effect as exposure to air for a long period of time. It indicates no distinction in the blood of the sexes, of the foetus and adult, or in the blood of man and animals. As a corroborative process it furnishes most valuable and trustworthy evidence, and there is no case in which blood admits of a chemical examination, in which spectral analysis does not admit of ' application before the chemical tests are employed. In a case of alleged murder, which was the subject of investigation in 1866, some faint reddish-coloured stains on grey woollen cloth, visible only in a strong light, were suspected to have been caused bv blood. T


[286/872 b22652516_0286.jp2]

274 BLOOD. H^MIN-CEYSTALS. BLOOD-CORPUSCLES. Other stains on an overcoat worn by the accused person were also attributed to blood. Sorby examined some of the stains by the optical process, and he obtained a distinct spectrum characteristic of blood. The author examined microscopically and chemically other stained portions of the grey woollen cloth, and came to the same conclusion as Sorby, namely, that the faint reddish-coloured stains had been caused by blood. The processes, although widely different, agreed in the results, and it may be mentioned that, from the fact of the blood-stains having been wetted and sponged, a more difficult case for investigation could hardly have presented itself. The methods of examination also agreed in the result that some suspected stains or marks on the over- coat were not caused by blood. The date of a blood-stain cannot, however, be determined with qlhj certainty by this process, unless the conditions under which it has been kept are known; and it is not possible to distinguish by it animal from human blood. (See Sorby, ' Quart. Jour, of Sci.,' April, 1865, p. 205; ' Pop. Sci. Rev.,' Jan. 1866, p. 66.) Bcemin-Crystals.—Another process for the detection of blood consists in the production of microscopic crystals of hcerain (hydrochlorate of hsematin). These crystals may be produced by evaporating to dryness a fragment of blood-clot with an excess of glacial acetic acid and a trace of chloride of sodium. More acetic acid is then added, and the evapo- ration repeated, but more slowlj^ The residue is examined under the microscope, with a power of 300 to 500 diameters. Crystals like those seen in Fig. 41 are observed. Microscopical Evidence. Blood- Corpuscles.—Hitherto the micro- scope has been referred to as an aid to the examiner in drawing a distinction between the appear- ances presented by blood-stains in the dry state, and those caused by other substances. Its use, however, extends much beyond Blood-crystals as obtained from human blood, this. The spotS Or StainS may be so small as not to admit of removal for the purpose of applying chemical tests. If an examination of the dry stain with a low power (20 or 30 diameters) justifies further proceedings, we may then employ the microscope for the pur- pose of detecting those peculiar bodies on which the colour of red blood is known to depend. The red colouring matter of blood consists of minute coloured corpuscles, floating in a clear hquid (serum). The engraving (Fig. 42, p. 275) shows the form which the corpuscle presents in the class Mammalia, a represents the circular form, when seen in front, the shaded portion being a depression which, under a certain dis- Fig, 41.


[287/872 b22652516_0287.jp2]

MICROSCOPICAL EVIDEJJCE. position of the light, assumes the appearance of a solid and opaque nucleus; b represents the corpuscle seen edgewise, in which case it presents somewhat the outline of a biconcave lens. It owes this form to the central depression on each face. Other red colouring matters, such as madder, cochineal, or lac, do not owe their colour to independent cells or corpuscles. _ ^' Hence, if corpuscles, of the form and size of those found in mammalian blood, are visible under the microscope, there can be no doubt that the liquid is blood. Such evidence can, however, be safely received only from one who has been accustomed to the use of this instru- ment, and to the examination of blood. In order Blood-corpuscle, highly to examine the suspected substance for corpuscles, the best plan of proceeding, when the particles of coagulum are very small, is to breathe several times on a glass slide, then place the small fragments of coagulum on the slide, and again breathe over them. A thin cover glass may then be laid upon them. If they consist of blood, a red margin will soon appear, and in the fluid portion, by the aid of a magnifying power of from 300 to 500 diameters, some of the corpuscles of the blood may be recognized. They are seldom so perfectly spherical as in the fresh state, and they appear small, and frequently shrunk or corrugated. In some cases, only fragments of the envelopes can be seen. The condensed moisture of the breath may serve the purpose of water, in breaking up the small portions of dried blood, without destroj'-- ing the corpuscles by too much dilution, but in general the addition of a small quantity of water with one-ninth of its volume of glycerine, or some other liquid of the sp. gr. 1-028, is necessary. If the suspected clot is in larger quantity, it may be removed from the stuff and macerated in one or two drops of water and glycerine, as above, on a glass slide. It should be covered with thin glass, in order to prevent rapid evaporation. This method of extracting the corpuscles has frequently failed, owing to water alone having been employed. Under these circumstances, the corpuscles are dis- tended, become of a globular form, of less diameter, paler, and are finally destroyed, while the water simply becomes coloured. It is by no means easy in all cases to obtain from dry coagula clear and distinct evidence of the presence of these corpuscles, especially when the blood is old. In drying, the blood-cells lose their form, and they do not readily resume it when again moistened. Unless they are seen after a short maceration in a very small quantity of water, it is probable they will not be seen at all. To accelerate their separation, various chemical liquids have been recommended. Thus strong solutions of sulphate of sodium, chloride of sodium, and iodide of potassium have been employed as fluid media for breaking up the dried clots of blood. There are some disadvantages attending the use of these sahne solutions. A mixture of glycerine and water may be employed in place of them. The most convenient proportions are one part by measure of glycerine to nine or ten parts by measure of distilled water. A cold saturated solution of


[288/872 b22652516_0288.jp2]

BLOOD. MICROSCOPICAL CHARACTER. 276 Fig. 43. borax in water is useful. A solution of arsenious acid, in the propor- tion of four grains to an ounce of distilled water, as recommended by Kunze, is also a rapid solvent of the coagula. When this is used, the examination should take place as soon as the liquid begins to be coloured at the margin, or the corpuscles may be destroyed, and only fragments of their envelopes seen. In reference to stains on clothing, if they present any appearance of dry coagula, these should be carefully scraped off, and treated in the manner above described. If no portions of solid coagula can be procured, there will be but little hope of obtaining evidence of the presence of corpuscles in the suspected stain. The stained portion may be cut out and mace- rated in a small quantity of water. Under these circumstances, the corpuscles may be sometimes seen aggregated, or in groups, in the fibres of the stuff, as in the annexed en- graving (Fig. 43), in which the stain of blood was on a shirt. The subjoined illustrations (Figs. 44 and 45) show the appearances presented by blood-corpuscles, when examined by a power of about 300 diameters, and under different methods of treatment. Fig. 44 represents the appearance of a drop of healthy human blood. The red blood- detached. Fig. 44. Fig. 45. Human blood-corpuscles with fibrin. Human blood-corpuscles from a dried specimen, magnified 319 diameters. globules are partly detached, partly united in rolls, and partly in irregular clusters. In the spaces between them there are delicate threads of fibrin. The outlines of the blood-globules are in some instances rendered indistinct, by reason of this web of fibrin above them. In Fig. 45, the corpuscles are seen free from fibrin, and in groups (a) as well as singly. Only a small portion of those which were in the field have been engraved. The shaded bodies (b) are the white corpuscles of the blood; they are larger, but less numerous, not so


[289/872 b22652516_0289.jp2]

BLOOD OF MAfJ" AND ANIMALS. 277 well defined in form, and they present an irregularity of surface, by which they may be distinguished from the coloured blood-globules. Some practice in the use of the microscope is required to enable a medical man to arrive at a correct conclusion in these investigations. Granules of starch and the spores of vegetables might be mistaken for blood-corpuscles. Erdmann states that, in examining some articles of clothing in a case of suspected murder, he thought he had detected blood-globules in the hquid which he procured, but he found on further inspection that they consisted of the red-coloured spores of an alga known as the Porphyridium cruentum. (' Edin. Med. Jour.,' Oct. 1862, p. 370.) The size of the bodies as well as their shape will sometimes aid the observer. The blood-corpuscles have a definite size : the bodies seen under the microscope may be either too large or too small to fall within the exceptional range of size. Hence the micrometer is a neces- sary adjunct to the instrument. Granules of starch would be identified by the blue colour imparted to them by iodine. Blood of Man and Animals.—When marks of blood have been detected on the dress of an accused person, it is by no means unusual to find these marks accounted for by his having been engaged in killing a pig, bullock, or sheep, or in handling fish or dead game. Of course, every allowance must be made for a statement like this, which can be proved or disproved only by circumstances; but the question here arises whether we possess any certain means of distinguishing the blood of a human being from that of an animal. There are no ascertained chemical differences between the blood of man and animals. The red colouring matter, the albumen and fibrin,, are the same, and chemical reagents produce on them precisely similar results. The microscopical differences refer to the shape and size of the corpuscles. 1. With respect to shape. In all animals with red blood, the globules have a disc-like or flattened form. In the mam- malia, excepting the camel tribe, the outline of the disc is circular (Fig. 42 a, p. 275). In this tribe, and in birds, fishes, and reptiles, the corpuscles have the form of a lengthened ellipse or oval. In the three last-mentioned classes of animals they have a central nucleus, which gives to them an apparent prominence in the centre. In apply- ing the guaiacum test to this variety of blood, it is found that the nucleus acquires a deep blue colour, while the oval margin or envelope is of a violet tint. In mammalian blood the round corpuscle acquires a uniform blue colour. (' Amer. Jour. Med. Sci.,' Jan. 1874, p. 128.), The blood-corpuscles of all the mammalia, including those of the camel tribe, have no central nucleus, and they appear depressed in the centre. The microscope, therefore, enables an observer to distinguish the blood of birds, fishes, and reptiles from that of a human being or from mammalian blood; and this may be of great importance as evidence. In the case of Reg. v. Lihbey (Cornwall Sum. Ass., 1871), the prisoner, who was indicted for the murder of her child, alleged that some blood found on certain articles of clothing was fowl's blood; but the medical witness was able to prove that this statement was untrue.


[290/872 b22652516_0290.jp2]

SIZE OF BLOOD-CORPUSCLES. 278 He examined the stains with the microscope, and foimd that the corpuscles had not the oval form of those in the blood of a bird; but he was unable to say whether they were human or animal. This evidence tended to prove the falsehood of the defence. The chief microscopical distinction between the hlood of man and domestic animals consists in a minute difference in the diameter of the corpuscles. This, however, is only an average difference ; for the corpuscles are found of different sizes in the blood of the same animal. In making use of this criterion, it would be necessary to rely upon the size of the majority of the corpuscles seen in a given area, and under the same power of the microscope. It is a curious fact that their size bears no relation to the size of the animal. Thus, in the horse, ox, ass, cat, mouse, pig, and bat, they are, on an average, nearly of the same size ; the difference is so slight as to be practically inappreciable. In these animals they are smaller than in man and in several of the mammalia. The corpuscles in man, the dog, the rabbit, and the hare are of nearly the same size. In the blood of the sheep and goat they are much smaller than in other mammalia, while in man they are larger than in any of the domestic mammalia. The size of the corpuscles bears no proportion to the age of the animal: thus in the blood of the human foetus, they are to be found as large as in that of the adult. The measured diameter of the corpuscles in human hlood varies, according to Gulliver, from 1-2000th to 1-4000th of an inch (0 00050 to 0-00025 inch), the average size in both sexes being l-3200th (0-00031) of an inch. In fresh human blood the author found the average diameter of the corpuscles to be 1-3500th (0-00029) of an inch, the maximum size being l-3000th (0-00033), and the minimum l-5000th (0-00020) of an inch. The corpuscles of human blood are larger than those of domestic animals. The subjoined measurements, in fractions of an inch, are those given by Gulliver, excepting those given in italics, which are from the author's own observations. The average diameter is, in the dog, l-3540th (0-00029), max. l-4000th (0-00025), min.l-eOOOth (0.00017); in the hare, l-3607th (0-00028), max. l-2000th (0-00050), min. l-SOOOth (0-00012), average l-4000th (0.00025); in the rabbit, l-4000th (0-00025); in the mouse, l-3814th (0-00026); in the ass, l-4000th (0-00025); in the pig, l-4230th (0-00024), which accords with the author^s measurements, l-4250th; in the ox, l-4267th (0-00023) ; in the cow, l-4000th (0-00025) to 1-4200th (0-00024); in the cat, l-4400th (0-00023); in the horse, l-4600th (0-00022), or l-5000th (0-00020); in the sheep, l-5300th (0-00019), or l-5333rd to l-6000th (0'00019 to 0'00017); in the goat, 1-6366th (0-00016). These measurements apply to recent blood, which has not been allowed to become dry on animal and vegetable stuffs. In this case a distinction might be easily made between the blood of a human being and a sheep or goat. With respect to the dog, hare, and rabbit, it would be, even under these favourable circumstances, a matter of some difficulty. When blood is dried on clothing, and ;it becomes necessary to extract the corpuscles by means of a liquid of


[291/872 b22652516_0291.jp2]

BLOOD-CORPUSCLES OF MAN AND ANIMALS. 279 a different nature from the serum, it would be unsafe to rely on minute fractional differences, since we cannot be sure that the corpuscles, after having been once dried, will ever reacquire, in a foreign liquid, the exact size which they had in serum. (See 'Guy's Hosp. Kep.,' 1851, vii. pt. ii. p. 414.) It is generally admitted by scientific men that we have at present no certain method of distinguishing human from other mammalian blood, when it has been once dried on an article of clothing or on a weapon. This is the practical form in which the problem usually comes before a medical jurist. He may be able to state that the shape and size of the corpuscles, as seen by the microscope, are consistent with the blood being mammalian, and probably human, but that it is impossible to say with absolute certainty that it is not the blood of an animal like the ox or pig. Richardson, of Philadelphia, U.S., has made a considerable step in advance on the microscopical examination of blood. (' Amer. Jour. Med. Sci.,' July, 1874.) By the use of higher powers up to 750 diameters, and by other appliances, he asserts that he has been able to distinguish, under favourable conditions, the blood of man from that of such animals as the ox and pig, and to give evidence thereon on certain trials for murder. It will be understood that, as the magnifying power increases, the relative difference in the size of the corpuscles is more apparent. Thus, when at 300 diameters it would be scarcely possible to distinguish the blood of man from that of the pig, at 650 diameters the difference in size is well marked. The plates (Figs. 46 and 47), taken from a photograph by Seller, represent, under the same power (650 diameters), the corpuscles in the blood of man and the pig. In each of the engravings only a small portion of the blood is represented, the whole of the photo- graph, with the two varieties of blood and the micrometric scale, being much too large for a page of this work. Seller's process is described in the ' Amer. Med. Times,' Feb. 19, 1879, p. 249. The larger size Fig. 46. F'-g. 47. Human corpuscles, l-3500th. Pigs' corpuscles, l-4250tb.


[292/872 b22652516_0292.jp2]

28o STAINS OF BLOOD ON LINEN AND OTHER STUFFS. of the corpuscles in human blood (Fig. 46) is at once perceptible, and it may be observed that the smallest of the human corpuscles thus highly magnified is larger than the largest of those in the pig (Fig. 47). This observation was made on fresh blood, for Seller candidly admits that he has not been able to obtain satisfactory results with dried blood- stains, the problem which in practice most commonly presents itself for solution. From one well experienced in the use of the higher powers of the microscope, evidence of the probable nature of the blood might be receivable, but skilled experts of this kind are rarely found among medical witnesses, and when the blood is dried the evidence is generally inadmissible. In all cases in which the microscope is employed for the examination of blood-corpuscles, a comparison of the sample should always be made with the kind of blood, whether human or animal, which it is supposed to represent. Copeman has recently described a method of distinguishing human from all other kinds of blood (St. Thomas's Hosp. Rep., 1888, p. 95). He asserts that human blood, as well as that of the monkey, crystal- lizes in the form of reduced haemoglobin, whilst that of all other animals crystallizes in the form of oxyhsemoglobin; and that the spectroscope reveals this dilference. A few drops of putrid serum suffice to bring about crystallization of the pigment in a solution of blood. To distinguish between the blood of man and the monkey, it suffices to note that the crystals of human reduced haemoglobin are almost invariably rectangular plates, whilst those from monkey's blood are for the most part diamond-shaped plates, or else hexagonal plates like those of the sheep and ox. This method is not altogether satisfactory when applied to dried blood. In general it is found sufficient if the witness can say that the blood-stains on an article of dress have the characters of mammalian blood, and might be the blood of a human being. The blood of birds, fishes, and reptiles presents no difficulty, and in trials for murder the statement of a prisoner is occasionally proved false by the medical evidence derived from the microscope {tieg. v. Lihhey, see p. 277). A prisoner was charged {Reg. v. Ward, Leeds Ass., Nov. 1878) with murder and highway robbery. The deceased was found dead, with marks of severe blows on the head. Among other circumstances which connected the prisoner with this crime was a large spot of blood upon his trousers. When asked to account for this, he said it was the blood of a fowl. The medical witness was able to state that this was not the blood of a bird, but of a mammal. Poachers have their clothes often stained with blood in contests with gamekeepers. The stains have in these cases been sometimes referred to the carrying of pheasants or partridges, but the medical evidence has shown that the form of the corpuscles was inconsistent with this defence. /Stains of Blood on Linen and other /Stuffs. Their Age or Date.— Supposing the stuff" to be white, or nearly colourless, the spot of blood, if recent^ is of a bright-red colour; but by exposure it sooner or later


[293/872 b22652516_0293.jp2]

281 BLOOD. ITS AGE. ANALYSIS. becomes of a reddish-brown, or of a deep red-brown colour. This cliange of colour to a reddish-brown takes place in warm weather in less than twenty-four hours. After a period of five or six days, it is scarcely possible to determine, from the appearance, the date of a stain even conjecturally. In a large stain of blood on linen, no change took place during a period of five years: it had a reddish-brown colour at the end of six weeks, which it retained for the long period mentioned. Indeed, it is extremely difficult in any case, after the lapse of a week, to give an opinion as to the actual date of a stain. Upon coloured stuffs or dirty clothes, it is of course impossible to trace these physical changes in stains of blood; on red-dyed stuffs the stain appears simply darker from the first, and in all cases the fibre of the stuff is more or less stiffened, as a result of the drying of the albumen asso- ciated with the red colouring matter. In examining an article of clothing, attention should be paid to the side of the stuff which has first received the stain: sometimes both sides are stained. The evidence derived from an observation of this kind may be occasionally of importance. The suspected stain should be first examined, in a strong light, with a low power of the microscope. If caused by blood, it will not be a mere colouring of the fibres, but it will have a shining glossy appear- ance, and each fibre will be observed to be invested with a portion of dried coagulum, or clot. In other cases, minute coagula, presenting the appearance of dried red jelly, will be seen in the meshes of the stained article of clothing. In certain lights the clots may appear of a dark-red colour, but by changing the light, bright translucent portions of a peculiar crimson tint will come into view. The crimson stain of blood is unlike that of any other red colouring matter, and when the stained portion presents the character of a glossy dry coagulum, the stain cannot be easily mistaken by a practised eye for one caused by any other red-coloured hquid. In fact, the microscope puts the observer of a minute stain in the same position as a non-professional person, who unhesitatingly forms his judgment from a large quantity of dried blood. Portions of kino over a dress may present occasionally the appearance of coagulated blood, but kino differs in colour and in chemical properties from blood. The microscopical observation of a suspected stain on linen, cotton, or woollen, however small, is generally sufficient to enable an expert to form an opinion either in the affirma- tive or negative. The application of chemical and spectroscopic tests should, however, be resorted to for confirmatory evidence. Analysis.—If the quantity of blood is small, the stained substance may be cut up and macerated in a porcelain capsule, with just enough water to keep it well moistened. After an hour it may be pressed, and a red-coloured liquid will be thus obtained in a fit state for testing. The editor finds that a cold saturated solution of borax is generally the best solution for dissolving the blood-pigment from blood-stains. This solution, having a density of 1-020, rather less than that of blood- serum, is well adapted for the examination of stains for blood-corpuscles under the microscope. A solution of borax quickly dissolves blood-


[294/872 b22652516_0294.jp2]

282 BLOOD. CHEMICAL REAGENTS. RED STAINS. pigment from leather, iron, and soil; and, moreover, acts as a preserva- tive, so that the solution retains its characters for several days. It may- be objected that red stains resembling blood are occasionally found on linen and other stuffs, and may give rise to error. All such stains are either entirely insoluble in water, or they are soluble and yield red- coloured hquids. If insoluUe, they cannot be mistaken for blood-stains; if soluble, no mistake can arise provided the red hquid so obtained is submitted to chemical tests. Blood-stains rendered insoluble in water, by heat or from some other cause, must be tested by another method. When the stain is of old date, a solution in water is very slowly obtained, and it does not present the bright red colour of blood. In some cases, if the stain is of very old standing, and has been much exposed to the atmosphere, water will have scarcely any solvent effect upon it, and it may be found impossible to obtain a red-coloured liquid even after twenty-four hours' maceration. At the most the ■water may acquire a pale-brown or yellowish colour, but wholly unlike that imparted by blood. In such a case it is useless to add ammonia. We may, however, generally form a correct judgment by the micro- scopical appearance of the stain before wetting it, and by the guaiacum process. Water may dissolve sufficient albumen (or serum) to become opaline by heat, or by the addition of nitric acid, although we may fail to obtain any evidence of the presence of corpuscles. From the results obtained by spectral analysis, it appears probable that acid and other vapours in the atmosphere affect blood-stains and alter their chemical properties. Where much coal is burnt, sulphurous acid may operate in this manner. Under other circumstances, when the quantity of blood effused is moderately large, it may be detected by the process above mentioned after the lapse of a considerable time. We have thus detected the blood of the human body, and of the bullock, on cotton, linen, and flannel, after a lapse of three years. The spectroscopic test should also be applied, and the bands of either haemoglobin, or of hsemochromogen, or of both bodies obtained, if possible. A portion of the fabric may also be treated with acetic acid for the obtaining of hsemin-crystals (see p. 274, ante). If the stuff be dyed, we should proceed to examine the stains found upon it by a similar process. The dye is commonly fixed, and is not soluble in water. Thus, then, in testing for blood we rely upon : 1. The solubility of the red colouring matter in water. 2. The negative action of ammonia. 3. The positive effect of heat in entirely coagulating and destroying the red colouring matter. 4. The blue colour produced by guaiacum in the presence of peroxide of hydrogen. 5. The appearances of the spectrum. 6. The production of hsemin-crystals. 4, 5, and 6 are the most im- portant reactions of blood. There are red stains bearing a resemblance to blood, which are insoluble in water. These may be identified by their special characters. Among them are : 1. Certain red dyes, as madder, which, when fixed by a mordant, is not readily affected by ammonia. 2. Iron-moulds. These are of a reddish-brown colour, sometimes of a bright or crange- red; they are quite insoluble in water, but are easily dissolved by


[295/872 b22652516_0295.jp2]

283 WASHED BLOOD-STAINS. maceration in diluted hydrochloric acid, and on adding ferrocyanide of potassium to the solution, the presence of iron will be at once proved by the production of Prussian blue. The acid used for this purpose should contain no iron. Iron-moulds are generally distinguished by their brown colour, and by the absence of all stiffening or glossiness of the fibre in the stained spot. 3. Red paint. Stains made with red paint, containing red oxide of iron, have been mistaken for blood. They may be easily identified by digesting them in diluted hydrochloric acid, and applying to the solution the tests for ferric salts. Li'ke those produced by iron-moulds, they are quite insoluble in water, and therefore cannot be confounded with blood-stains. The same may be said of spots of the ammonio-nitrate of silver changed by light, which the author has known to be mistaken for old stains of blood. The stuff on which the spots of blood are found may be itself stained with a red dye or colour, or it may be dyed with iron: in this case it will be necessary to test by the same process a piece of the coloured or stained portion, in order to furnish negative evidence that the suspected stains are due to blood. 4. Among soluble stains resembling those of blood in colour, are the spots produced by the juices of the mulberry, currant, gooseberry, and other red fruits. They may be sometimes recognized chemically by dropping on them a weak solution of ammonia, when the spot is turned either a blueish, olive-green, or green colour. The red of cochineal is changed into a crimson on the addition of weak ammonia; but a spot of blood treated with this alkali undergoes no change of colour. Eosin, used as a red ink, gives a solution to water which is strongly fluorescent. Diluted acids brighten the red colours of i'ruit- stains, but they do not alter the colour of blood. A strong solution of chlorine bleaches the red colours from fruit-stains, but when applied to a stain of blood it turns the red colouring matter to a dark olive-green tint and does not bleach it. Finally, they are not coloured blue by tincture of guaiacum with peroxide of hydrogen. These changes of colour are only well observed on colourless stuffs. If the stain is on black cloth, the colour may be extracted by water and tested, or the following plan may be adopted: the stain is wetted with distilled water, and after a time several layers of white blotting- paper are firmly pressed upon it. The red colour, if present, is thus transferred to the paper, and may be tested by fresh tincture of guaiacum and peroxide of hydrogen. If the guaiacum alone is blued by contact, some other method of corroboration must be adopted, since the red colour of blood has no action on this resin until after the addi- tion of peroxide of hydrogen. If no red or reddish-brown colour is communicated to the paper, or if the stain on paper produces no blue colour with a mixture of guaiacum and peroxide, it cannot be owing to blood. With ordinary precautions the guaiacum process may be safely used, and, by the aid of it, stains which have been washed for the purpose of obliteration may be detected, so long as the slightest indication of red colour remains in the washed fabric. It will even give the reactions for blood upon calico or linen which has been so thoroughly washed as to appear almost colourless. In order to guard


[296/872 b22652516_0296.jp2]

BLOOD ON WEAPONS. 284 against any fallacy, an unstained portion of calico, linen, paper, or cloth should be first tested. In any case a negative result will fully justify the opinion that there have been no blood-stains washed out of the stuff. The great use of the guaiacuin process is in enabling the operator to distinguish the red colouring matter of blood from other red colouring matters. Detection of Blood on Weapons.—A knife, dagger, or sword may have been used for inflicting a wound, and may have no stain upon it, or only a slight yellowish film of dried serum. It may, in fact, have been wiped by drawing it through the wound or clothes. In other cases the weapon may have well-marked stains upon it, and when these are recent and on a clean or polished surface, they may be easily recog- nized ; but when of old standing, or on a rusty piece of metal, it is a matter of some difficulty to distinguish them from the stains produced by rust or other causes. If the stain is large and dry, a portion may be scraped off, and placed in a watch-glass with some distilled water, the solution filtered to separate any oxide of iron, and then tested. If the water by simple maceration does not acquire a red or red-brown colour, the stain is probably not due to blood. If it acquires a red colour, the solution may be tested by the methods described at p. 282. Sometimes the stain appears on a dagger or knife, either in the form of a thin yellowish or reddish film, or in rusty streaks. The dry matter is scraped into a small porcelain dish and a little water poured on it. If a red-coloured solution is obtained, this may be pipetted off and tested for blood. The residue, evaporated to dryness, may be treated with guaiacum and peroxide of hydrogen. The particles of blood are thus distinguished from those of iron-rust by the small zones of blue colour formed around them. The rust is not thus affected. . There is a remarkable resemblance to the stains of blood on metal, produced by the oxides or certain vegetable salts of iron. If the juice or pulp of lemon or orange is spread upon a steel blade, and is exposed to the air for a few days, the resemblance to blood produced by the formation of citrate of iron is occasionally so strong that we have known well- informed surgeons to be completely deceived: they have pronounced the spurious stain to be blood. These stains, which owe their colour to citrate of iron, may be thus distinguished: the substance is soluble in water, forming, when filtered, a yellowish-brown solution, totally different from the red colour of l3lood under the same circumstances. The solution undergoes no change of colour on the addition of ammonia. It is unchanged in colour, but may be partially coagulated at a boiling temperature, and is at once identified as a soluble salt of iron by giving a blue colour with ferrocyanide of potassium. It is not always easy to distinguish by sight a stain of blood on a weapon from a mark produced by iron-rust. When strong suspicion exists, marks are often pronounced to be due to blood, which, under other circumstances, would have passed unnoticed. One source of difficulty is this : the iron-rust on an old knife may be mixed with some article of food or even with blood itself. We must here pursue the mode of examination above described to distinguish the rust from


[297/872 b22652516_0297.jp2]

ARTERIAL AND VENOUS BLOOD. 285 blood (p. 282). From the foregoing remarks, we may justly infer that the chemical analysis of suspected spots or stains on weapons and clothing is by no means an unimportant duty. If we cannot always obtain from these experiments affirmative evidence, they often furnish good negative proof, and thus tend to remove unjust suspicions against accused persons. Arterial and Venous Blood. — It is not possible to distinguish arterial from venom blood by any physical or chemical characters, when it has been effused for some days, and is in a dry state upon articles of dress or furniture ; but this, in medico-legal practice, is not often a subject of much importance, since there are few cases of severe wounds, either in the throat or other parts of the body, in which the two kinds of blood do not escape simultaneously. The most striking and apparent difference between them, when recently effused, is the colour; the arterial being of a bright scarlet, while the venous is of a dark-red hue; but it is well known that the latter, when exposed to air for a short time, acquires a florid red or arterial colour; and the kinds of blood, when dried, cannot be distinguished chemically by any known criterion. If the coat, or other stufl, stained with blood, were of a dark colour, the liquid would be absorbed, and speedily lose its physical characters. Arterial coagulates more firmly than venous blood. The microscope shows no appreciable difierence in the blood- corpuscles, and chemistry does not enable us to apply any test so as to make a satisfactory distinction between them. In this deficiency of microscopical and chemical evidence, an attempt has been made to establish a distinction by noticing the physical appearance of the blood-stains. Thus, it is alleged, the arterial blood will be indicated by its being sprinkled over surfaces upon which it has fallen, while the venous blood is always poured out in a full stream. In most wounds which prove fatal by hsemorrhage, the blood is poured out simul- taneously from arteries and veins. The sprinkled appearance of the blood, when it exists, will, cceteris paribus, create a strong presumption that it was poured out from a living body—for after the heart has ceased to act, the arteries lose the power of throwing out the blood in jets. The sprinkling is usually observed when the wounded artery is small, and the blood is effused at a distance. This is a fact which a medical jurist should not overlook, although, for the reasons stated, too great a reliance must not be placed on it. The spots of blood, if thrown out from a living blood-vessel, speedily consolidate, and the fibrin, with the greater portion of the colouring matter, is found of a deep-red colour at the lower part of the spot, the upper portion being of a pale red. The lower and thicker part has commonly a shining lustre, as if gummed, when the spot is recent, and when it has been effused upon a non-absorbent surface. When blood falls upon porous articles of clothing, it is often absorbed, and produces dull stains. In dark-coloured articles of dress, it is some- times difficult by dayhght to perceive these stains. The part appears stiffened, and has a dull red-brown colour, which is sometimes more perceptible when seen by the reflection of the light of a candle. In


[298/872 b22652516_0298.jp2]

BLOOD-STAINS ON CLOTHING. 286 trusting to the coagulation of the sprinkled blood as evidence of its escape from a living vessel, it must be remembered that three hours ma}^ elapse before it coagulates in the healthy body after death. Hence blood which has escaped from a recently dead body, although it would not be found diffused as if by spurting, might, in so far as coagulation is concerned, assume the appearance of having been effused from a living body. In spite of the great advances made in the construction and use of the microscope, there is no method known by which the blood of a man can be distinguished from that of a woman, or the blood of a child from that of an adult. The blood of a child at birth forms a thinner and softer coagulum than that of the adult. A medico-legal question has arisen, on more than one occasion, as to whether there were any means of distinguishing menstrual blood from that of the body generally. This liquid contains fibrin, although the proportion is less than in venous or arterial blood, red colouring matter, and the other con- stituents of blood. The only differences noticed are of an accidental kind : first, that it is acid, owing to its admixture with vaginal mucus; and second, that under the microscope it is mixed with epithelial scales, which it has derived from the mucous membrane in its passage through the vagina. In the bodies of women who had died suddenly while menstruating, Webber found coagulated blood upon the uterine mucous membrane. If, therefore, menstrual blood does not coagulate, it is simply because it has already coagulated within the uterine cavity, and cannot do so again; it is more fluid than ordinary blood, because, during its trickling descent, it becomes mixed with watery uterine and vaginal mucus. (Schmidt's ' Jahrb.,' 1849, 7, 139.) A case occurred in France, which induced the Minister of Justice to refer the con- sideration of this question to the Academy of Medicine. The reporters, Adelon, Moreau, and Le Canu, came to the conclusion that there were no means of distinguishing menstrual blood dried on clothing from that which might be met with in a case of infanticide or abortion. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1846, t. 1, p. 181.) For a very full description of the methods to be adopted in the examination of supposed blood-stains under various circumstances, the reader is referred to a memoir by Dragendorflf. (Maschka's ' Handb. der Gerichtl. Med.,' bd. i. p. 481, et seq.)


[299/872 b22652516_0299.jp2]

WOUNDS. CAUSE OF DEATH. 287 CHAPTER 28. THE CAUSE OF DEATH FROM WOUNDS.—WOUNDS DIRECTLY OR INDIRECTLY FATAL.—DEATH FROM HEMORRHAGE.—INTERNAL BLEEDING,—DEATH FROM MECHANICAL INJURY.—FROM SHOCK—DEATH FROM NUMEROUS PERSONAL INJURIES IRRESPECTIVE OF ANY MORTAL WOUND. It is important for a medical witness to bear in mind that, in all cases of wounds criminally inflicted, the cause of death must be certain. No man is ever convicted upon mere medical probability. In general, there is only one real cause of death, although other circumstances may have assisted in bringing about a fatal result. Thus a person cannot die of disease in the bowels and a stab in the chest at the same time, nor of apoplexy from disease and compression of the spinal marrow at the same instant. Hence it is our duty, when several apparent causes for death exist, to determine which was the real cause; and, in stating it to the court, to be prepared to offer our reasons for this opinion. In most cases of local injury, when a person dies speedily, there will be no great trouble in settling whether disease or the injury was the cause. A difficulty may, however, exist when a person has recovered from the first effects of a wound, and has subsequently died. Besides, there may be cases in which the cause of death, in spite of the most careful deliberation, will be still obscure ; or sometimes it mdij happen that the death of a person appears to be as much dependent on bodily disease as on an injury proved to have been received at the time he was labouring under the disease. How is an opinion to be expressed in such a case ? The course that a medical witness ought to pursue, provided he has duly deliberated on the circumstances before he appears in court, and his mind is equally balanced between the two causes, is to state at once his doubt to the jury without circumlocution, and not allow it to be extracted from him in cross-examination. It is the hesitation to assign a satisfactory cause, or the assigning of many causes for death, that gives such advantage to a prisoner's case, even when the general evidence is entirely against him. Occasionally, several causes of death are vaguely assigned by a medical witness, among which some have a tendency to exculpate, and others to incul- pate, an accused person in a greater or less degree, and it is left to the jury to select from the number one upon which to found a verdict. In a case of this kind an acquittal is commonly obtained. Wounds directly or indirectly Fatal.—A wound may cause death either directly or indirectly. A wound operates as a direct cause of death when the wounded person dies either immediately, or very soon after its infliction, and there is no other cause, internally or externally, to account for death. In wounds which cause death indirectly, it is assumed that the person survives for a certain period, and that the wound is followed by inflammation, suppuration, pyaemia, gangrene, tetanus, erysipelas, or some other mortal disease which is a direct, and


[300/872 b22652516_0300.jp2]

288 WOUNDS. DEATH FROM HEMORRHAGE. not an unusual, consequence of the injury. Under this head may be also placed all those cases which prove fatal by reason of surgical operations rendered imperatively necessary for the treatment of an injury—presuming that these operations have been performed with ordinary skill and care. We shall for the present consider only the direct causes of death in cases of wounds. They are three in number : 1. Hcemorrhage^ or loss of blood. 2. Great mechanical injury done to an organ important to life. d. Shock, or concussion, affecting the nervous centres, whereby the functions of one or more vital organs are arrested, sometimes with but slight injury to the part struck or wounded. From any one of these causes a wounded person may die immediately or within a few minutes. 1. Death from Ilcemorrhage.—Loss of blood operates by producing fatal syncope (p. 35). A quantity of blood escaping from a vessel, although insufficient to cause death by affecting the heart and circu- lation, may readily destroy life by disturbing the functions of the organ or part into which it is effused. Thus a small quantity effused in or upon the substance of the brain, or at its base, may prove fatal by inducing fatal compression; and again, if in a case of wounded throat, blood should flow into the windpipe, it may cause death by asphyxia; i.e.hj stopping the respiratory process (p. 36). In these cases it is obvious that the blood acts mechanically; and in respect to the last condition a medical man, unless circumspection is used, may involve himself in a charge of malapraxis. If he allows the wound to remain open, the wounded person may die through haemorrhage ; if he closes it too soon, the person may die through suffocation; and, in either case, the counsel for a prisoner will not fail to take advantage of a plausible objection of this kind. In wounds of the chest, involving the heart and lungs, death is frequentl}^ due, not so much to the actual quantity of blood effused, as to the pressure which it produces upon these organs. A few ounces effused in the cavity of the bag enclosing the heart (pericardium) will entirely arrest the action of this organ. The absolute quantity of blood required to be lost in order to prove fatal, will, of course, vary according to numerous circumstances. The young, the aged, and those who are labouring under infirmity or disease, will perish sooner from loss of blood than others who are health}^ and vigorous. Women, cceteris parihm, are more speedily destroyed by bleeding than men. Infants are liable to die from this cause, as a result of slight wounds. An infant has been known to bleed to death from the bite of a single leech, or from the simple operation of lancing the gums. Even the healthy and vigorous, when their vital powers have been depressed by maltreatment or by brutal violence, will sink under the loss of a comparatively small quantity of blood. A medical jurist must not forget that some persons have a predisposition to excessive bleeding from slight injuries; and this condition is often hereditary. The slightest wound or puncture—the bite of a leech or the extraction of a tooth—will be attended with a loss of blood which cannot be arrested, and which will slowly lead to death by exhaustion. Cases have been frequently recorded of fatal hsemorrhage following the


[301/872 b22652516_0301.jp2]

289 DEATH FROM INTERNAL HEMORRHAGE. extraction of teeth, when there had been previously nothing to indicate the probable occurrence of death from so trivial a cause. Such cases are without (iifficulty detected; since a surgeon may always infer, from the part injured and the extent of the injury whether the bleeding is likely to be copious or not. When a person bleeds to death from what would, under common circumstances, be a simple wound, the admission of this fact may in certain cases lessen the responsibility of an accused party. A sudden loss of blood has a much more serious consequence than the same quantity lost slowly. A person may fall into a fatal swoon from a quantity of blood lost in a few seconds, which he would have been able to bear without sinking had it escaped slowly. This is the reason why the wound of an artery proves so much more rapidly fatal than that of a vein. Death speedily follows the wound of a large artery like the carotid; but it takes place with equal certainty, although more slowly, from wounds of smaller arteries. In a case in which one of the intercostal arteries was wounded by a small shot, haemorrhage caused death in thirty-eight hours. The loss of blood which follows the division of the smaller branches of the external carotid artery is often sufficient to destroy life, unless timely assistance be rendered. If a wound is in a vascular part, although no vessel of any importance be divided, the person may still die from bleeding. It is difficult to say what quantity of blood should be lost in order that a wound may prove fatal. The whole quantity contained in the body of an adult is esti- mated at about one-thirteenth of its weight—i.e. about twelve pounds (Halliburton's ' Text-Book of Chem. Physiol.,' p. 220); of this, one- fourth is considered to be distributed in the heart, lungs, large arteries, and veins. In various animals, the proportion of the weight of the blood to that of the body has been found to vary considerably; and probably this holds good for man also, within certain limits. According to Watson, the loss of from jSve to eight pounds is sufficient to prove fatal to adults. But while this may be near the truth, many persons will die from a much smaller quantity; the rapidity with which the effusion takes place having a considerable influence, as well as the age, sex, and bodily condition of the wounded person. It has been found by experi- ment that a dog cannot bear the loss of more blood than is equivalent to one-twelfth part of the weight of its body. Internal Haemorrhage.—Haemorrhage may prove fatal, although the blood does not visibly escape from the body. In incised wounds, the flow externally is commonly abundant; but in contused, punctured, and gunshot-wounds, the eflusion may take place internally and rapidly cause death. In severe contusions, or contused wounds involving highly vascular parts, the effusion may go on to an extent to prove fatal, either in the cavities of the body or throughout the cellular mem- brane and parts adjacent; several pounds of blood may thus be slowly or rapidly effused. The most fatal internal haemorrhages are those which follow ruptures of the organs from violence or disease. Ruptures of the heart, lungs, liver, and kidneys have thus caused death. In Nov. 1864, a man who had been run over was brought to Guy's u


[302/872 b22652516_0302.jp2]

DEATH FROM MECHANICAL INJURY. 290 Hospital. He complained of pain in the back, but there were no symptoms of severe injury, and no marks of violence were seen on the skin of the back. He left the hospital, and walked with some assist- ance to his home. A few hours afterwards he was found dead in bed. On inspection there was a large quantity of blood effused in the abdo- men. This had proceeded from one kidney, which had been ruptured transversely through its whole substance. In these cases the bleeding is not necessarily immediate ; but slight muscular exertion may increase it and accelerate death. In death from severe flagellation, blood may be effused in large quantity beneath the skin and among: the muscles : this effusion will operate as fatally as if it had flowed from an open wound. The means of ascertaining whether a person has died from bleeding by an open wound are these r unless the wound is situated in a vascular part, we shall find the vessel or vessels from which the blood has issued, divided; the neighbouring vessels empty, and the body more or less pallid; although this last condition is, of course, liable to be met with in certain cases of disease, as also under copious venesection—points easily determined by an examination. The blood will commonly be found more or less clotted or coagulated on those surfaces on which it has fallen. If, with these signs, there is an absence of disease hkely to prove rapidly fatal, and no other probable cause of death is apparent, this may be fairly referred to loss of blood. This opinion may, how- ever, be materially modified in reference to open wounds, by the fact of the body not being seen on the spot where the injury was actually inflicted, by the wound having been sponged, the blood removed by washing, and all traces of bleeding destroyed. Under these circum- stances, the case must in a great measure be made out by presumptive proof; and here a medical witness may have the duty thrown upon him of examining articles of dress, furniture, or weapons, for marks or stains of blood. It must not be supposed that all the blood met with round a wounded dead body, or in a cavity of the body, was actually effused during life. As soon as the heart's action ceases, the arteries pour out no more; but the blood, so long as it remains liquid, i.e. from four to eight or ten hours after death, and the warmth of the body is retained, continues to drain from the divided veins and smaller vessels. The quantity thus lost, however, is not considerable, unless the veins implicated are large, or the part is highly vascular, i.e. full of veins or small vessels. 2. Death from Great Mechanical Injury done to a Vital Organ.—We have instances of this becoming a direct cause of death in the crushing of the heart, lungs, or brain, by any heavy body passing over or falling on the cavities, as in railway accidents. The severe mechanical injury is sometimes accompanied by a considerable effusion of blood, so that the person really dies from hsemorrhage; but in other instances the quantity of blood lost is inconsiderable, and the fatal effects may be referred to shock to the nervous system. Sometimes a slight amount of violence may prove suddenly fatal. These are, however, to be re- garded as exceptional instances..


[303/872 b22652516_0303.jp2]

DEATH FROM SHOCK. 291 3. Death from Shock.—This is sometimes a direct cause of death imder the infliction of external violence; and in this case life is destroyed without the injury being to all appearance sufficient to account for so speedily fatal a result. On several occasions persons have died in railway collisions from no physical injury, but purely from shock to the system. In a collision, which took place in 1873 at the Durham station, a Mrs. Coble was among the dead. On a post-mortem examination there was no appearance of external or internal violence. Savory has suggested that death from shock is nothing more than death from temporary exhaustion of nerve-force, the result of a violent, sudden, and excessive expenditure of it. (' Lect. on Life and Death,' p. 171.) Whatever theory may be adopted to explain it, there is no doubt that a person may die from what is termed shock, without any marks of severe injury being discovered on his body after death. We have examples of this mode of death in accidents from lightning, or from severe bums or scalds, in which the local injury is often far from sufficient to explain the rapidly fatal consequences. As instances of this form of death from violence, may be also cited those cases in which a person has been suddenly killed by a blow upon the upper part of the abdomen or on the pit of the stomach, an accident which is supposed to operate by producing a fatal impression on the nerves and nerve-ganglia of the cardiac plexus. Whether this be or be not the true explanation, it is admitted by experienced surgeons that a person may die from so simple a cause without any mark of a bruise exter- nally, or physical injury internally to account for death. On the skin there may be some abrasion or slight discoloration; but, as it has been elsewhere stated, these are neither constant nor necessary accompani- ments of a blow. Concussion of the brain, unattended by visible mechanical injury, furnishes another example of this kind of death. A man receives a severe blow on the head; he falls dead on the spot, or becomes senseless and dies in a few hours. On an inspection, there may be merely the mark of a bruise on the scalp; in the brain there may be no rupture of vessels or laceration of substance, and all the other organs of the body may be found healthy. In railway accidents ersons have died under somewhat similar circumstances. There has een no physical indication of a mortal injury, and no cause apparent to account for death. This can be referred only to the shock or violent impression which the nervous system has sustained from the blow or violence—an impression which the vital powers were wholly unable to counteract or resist. A medical witness must give his evidence with caution in such cases; since it is the custom to rely in the defence upon the absence of any visible mortal wound or physical injury to account for death, as a proof that no injury was done—a principle which, if once unrestrictedly admitted, would leave a larger number of deaths, undoubtedly occurring from violence, wholly unex- plained. There is another form of shock, which is of some importance in medical jurisprudence. A person may have received many injuries, as by blows or stripes, not one of which, taken alone, could, in medical


[304/872 b22652516_0304.jp2]

MORTALITY OF WOUNDS. 292 language, be termed mortal; and yet he may die directly from the effects of the violence, either on the spot, or very soon afterwards. In the absence of any large efiiision of blood beneath the skin, death is commonly referred to exhaustion; but this is only another mode of expression; the exhaustion is itself dependent on a fatal influence or impression produced on the nervous system. A prize-fighter, after having sustained during many rounds numerous blows on the body, may either at or after the fight sink and die exhausted. His body may present marks of bruises, or even lacerated wounds, but there may be no internal changes to account for death. In common language, there is not a single injury which can be termed mortal; and yet, supposing him to have had good health previously to the fight, and all marks of disease indicative of sudden death to be absent, it is impos- sible not to refer his death to the direct effect of the violence. It is a well-ascertained medical fact, that a number of injuries, each compara- tively slight, are as capable of operating fatally, as anj^ single wound whereby some blood-vessel or organ important to life is directly affected. Age, sex, constitution, and a previous state of health or disease, may accelerate or retard the fatal consequences. In Reg. v. Slane and others (Durham Wint. Ass., 1872), it was proved that the deceased had sustained severe injuries to the abdomen by kicks and other violence, but there were no marks of bruises. On a post-mortem examination, all the organs were healthy. Nevertheless, death took place twenty minutes after the maltreatment. Death was attributed to shock, and the prisoners were convicted of murder. A case of manslaughter in- volving this question was tried [Reg. v. McGowan and others, Leicester Ass., Nov. 1877), where three men were charged with the murder o£< the deceased. It was proved that he had been maltreated by kicking, and by blows inflicted with heavy stones. He died in four days, obviously from the effects of the violence. The medical evidence showed that the nasal bones were much fractured as by a blow from a heavy stone, and that there were fractures of one clavicle and of several ribs. The witness assigned the cause of death to shock to the system, from the number of injuries received and the inflammation set up by them. The whole of the injuries in his opinion combined to cause death. The prisoners were convicted. From these considerations, it is obviously unreasonable to expect that in every case of death from violence or maltreatment there must be some specific and visible mortal injury to account for this event. When the circumstances accompanying death are unknown, a medical opinion should certainly be expressed with caution; but if we are informed that the deceased was in ordinary health and vigour previous to the infliction of the violence, and there is no morbid cause to account for his sudde7i illness and death, there is no reason why we should hesitate in referring death to the effects of a number of injuries. Among non-professional persons an unfounded prejudice exists that no person can die from violence unless there is some distinctly mortal wound actually inflicted on the body. By this we are to understand a visible mechanical injury to some organ or blood-vessel important to


[305/872 b22652516_0305.jp2]

MORTALITY OF WOUNDS. life; but this is obviously an erroneous notion, since death may take place from the disturbance of the functions of an organ important to life, without this being necessarily accompanied by a perceptible alter- ation of structure. The prevalence of this popular error often leads to a severe cross-examination of medical witnesses. Among the questions put, we sometimes find the following:—^Would you have said, from the wounds or bruises alone, that they were likely to have occasioned death ? Now, in answer to this it may be observed that we cannot always judge of the probability of death ensuing, from the appearance of external violence alone. Because the appearances were slight, it would be wrong to infer that they were not sufficient to cause death by shock. Then it may be inquired—Were the wounds or bruises mortal ? In the vulgar sense of the word, i.e. by producing great loss of blood, or a destruction of parts, they might not be so; but in a medical view they may have acted mortally by producing a shock to the nervous system. Again it may be inquired—Which of the several wounds or bruises found on the body of the deceased was mortal? The answer to this question may be, not one individually, but all contributed to occasion death by syncope or exhaustion. It must be remembered that in cases in which a person has sustained a number of injuries, the loss of a much smaller quantity of blood than in other instances will suffice to destroy life. When there are several wounds, it is difficult to decide on their relative degree of mortality, and on the share which each may have had in causing death. By a wound being of itself mortal, we are to understand that it is capable of causing death directly or indirectly, in spite of the best medical assistance. It is presumed that the body is healthy, and that no cause has intervened to bring about, or even accelerate, a fatal result. The circumstance of a person labouring under disease when wounded in a vital part, will not, of course, throw any doubt upon the fact of such a wound being necessarily mortal, and of its having caused death. If there should be more wounds than one, it is easy to say, from the nature of the parts involved, which was likely to have led to a fatal result. In order to determine, on medical grounds, whether a wound was or was not mortal, we may propose to ourselves this question—Would the deceased have been likely to die at the same time, and under the same circumstances, had he not received the wound? There can obviously be no general rule for determining the mortal nature of wounds. Each case must be judged by the circumstances which attend it. In some Continental states, the law requires that a medical witness should draw a distinction between a wound which is absolutely and one which is conditionally mortal. An absolutely mortal wound is defined to be that in which, the best medical assistance being at hand, being sent for, or actually rendered, the fatal event could not be averted. Wounds of the heart, aorta, and internal carotid arteries, are of this nature. A conditionally mortal wound is one in which, had medical assistance been at hand, been sent for, or timely rendered, the patient would, in all probability, have recovered. Wounds of the brachial.


[306/872 b22652516_0306.jp2]

2 94 WOUNDS. DEATH FROM NATURAL CAUSES. radial, and ulnar arteries may be taken as instances. The responsi- bility of an assailant is made to vary according to the class of injuries to which the wound may be referred by the medical witnesses; and, as it is easy to suppose, there is seldom any agreement on this subject. Our criminal law is entirely free from such subtleties. The effect of the wound, and the intent with which it was inflicted, are looked to; its anatomical relations, which must depend on pure accident, are never interpreted in a prisoner's favour. Some extenuation maj^ perhaps, be occasionally admitted when a wound proves mortal through an indirect cause, as inflammation or fever, and medical advice was obtainable, but not obtained until every hope of recovery had disappeared. It appears, however, from the case of Beg. v. Thomas and others (Gloucester Aut. Ass., 1841), that the mere neglect to call in medical assistance is not allowed in law to be a mitigatory circumstance in the event of death ensuing. The deceased died from the effects of a severe injury to the head, inflicted by the prisoners, but had had no medical assistance. The judge said it was possible that ' if he had had medical advice, he might not have died; but whoever did a wrongful act must take the whole consequences of it. It never could make any difference whether the party injured had or had not the means or the mind to apply for medical advice.' The prisoners were convicted. According to Lord Hale, if a man be wounded, and the wound, although not in itself mortal, turn to a gangrene or fever for want of proper applications, or from neglect, and the man die of gangrene or fever, this is homicide in the aggressor; for though the fever or gangrene be the immediate cause of death, yet the wound, being the cause of the gangrene or fever, is held the cause of death. These nice questions relative to the shades of responsibility for per- sonal injuries, occasionally arise in cases in which persons have been wounded at sea on board a ship in which there was no surgeon. CHAPTER 29. DEATH OF WOUNDED PERSONS FEOM NATURAL CAUSES.—DISTINCTION BETWEEN REAL AND APPARENT CAUSE.—DEATH FROM WOUNDS OR LATENT DISEASE. — ACCELERATING CAUSE.—DEATH FROM WOUNDS AFTER LONG PERIODS. —AVOIDABLE CAUSES OF DEATH.—NEGLECT.—IMPRUDENCE.—UNSKILFUL TREATMENT.—UNHEALTHY STATE OF BODY. Death of Wounded Persons from Natural Causes.—It is by no means unusual for individuals who have received a wound, or sustained some personal injury, to die from latent natural causes; and as, in the minds of non-professional persons, death may appear to be a direct result of the injury, the case can only be cleared up by the assistance of a medical practitioner. Such a coincidence has been witnessed in many instances of attempted suicide. A man has inflicted a severe wound on himself while labouring under disease; or some morbid


[307/872 b22652516_0307.jp2]

DEATH FllOM LATENT DISEASE. ^295 change tending to destroy life has occurred subsequently to the inflic- tion of a wound, and death has followed. Without a careful examina- tion of the body, it is impossible to refer death to the real cause. The importance of an accurate discrimination in a case in which wounds or personal injuries have been caused by another, must be obvious on the least reflection. A hasty opinion may involve the accused in a charge of manslaughter; and although counsel might be able to show on the trial that death was probably attributable, not to the wound, but to the co-existing disease, yet it must be remembered that the evidence of a surgeon before a coroner or magistrate, in remote parts of this country, may be the means of causing the person charged to be im- prisoned for some months previously to the trial. This is in itself a punishment, independently of the loss of character to which he must be in the mean time exposed. Death from Wounds or Latent Disease.—A natural cause of death may be lurking within the body at the time that a wound is crimi- nally inflicted, and a close attention to the symptoms preceding, and the appearances after death, can alone enable a surgeon to distinguish the real cause. A man may be severely wounded, and yet death may take place from rupture of the heart, the bursting of an aneurism, from apoplexy, phthisis, or other morbid causes which it is here unnecessary to specify. (' Cormack's Ed. Jour.,' 1846, p. 343.) If death can be clearly traced by an experienced surgeon to any of these diseases, the assailant cannot be charged with manslaughter; for the medical witness may give his opinion that death would have taken place about the same time and under the same circumstances whether the wound had been inflicted or not. On these occasions one of the following questions may arise—Was the death of the person accelerated by the wound ; or was the disease under which he was labouring so aggravated by the wound, as to pro- duce a more speedily fatal termination? The answer to either of these questions must depend on the circumstances of each case, and the witness's ability to draw a proper conclusion from these circum- stances. The maliciously accelerating of the death of another already labouring under disease, is criminal; for in a legal sense that which accelerates, causes. In Reg. v. Timms (Oxford Lent Ass., 1870), it was proved that the prisoner had struck the deceased some blows on the head with a hatchet. In twelve days, under treatment, he had partly recovered from the effects; but in six weeks afterwards he was seized with inflammation of the brain, with convulsions, and died. On inspec- tion, disease of the kidneys was found, of which there had been no symptoms. Death was referred to this disease and to inflammation of the brain as the result of the blows. The judge directed the jury that if they beheved the blows conduced in part to the death of the deceased, it was manslaughter, notwithstanding that other causes had combined with the blows to account for death. The prisoner was convicted. But there may be no connection between the violence and the disease causing death. In this case a charge of murder falls to the gi-ound. A man struck his father a blow upon the back of


[308/872 b22652516_0308.jp2]

296 WOUNDS. DEATH FROM LATENT DISEASE. the head with a hammer, inflicting a scalp-wound, with no signs of injury to the brain itself. The avowed object was to kill the ftither. As the injury was apparently not serious, the assailant was summarily sentenced by a magistrate to two months' imprisonment, a punish- ment which the father—a drimkard—thought inadequate. Hereupon the father became greatly excited—hemiplegic six days after the inflic- tion of the wound—and died three days later. On post-mortem exami- nation, the occipital bone was found indented at the seat of the blow, and there was a depressed fracture of the inner table of the skull at the point corresponding to the external injury. There was no effusion of blood on the surface of the brain in the neighbourhood of the injury, but a large clot was found in the lateral ventricle. Under these cir- cumstances, two medical men very properly gave it as their opinion that the immediate cause of death was apoplexy, the clot being in the usual position in such cases, and that there was nothing in the history of the case, or in the appearances after death, that would justify them in stating that the effusion of blood, or, in other words, the man's death, was caused by the injury; and, in spite of the remarks of the judge, the prisoner was acquitted. {Reg. v. Saxon, Lancashire Sum. Ass., 1884. 'Med. Chron.,' vol. i. p. 118.) In Eeg. v. Thompson (Liverpool Sum. Ass., 1876), involving a charge of murder, it was proved that the prisoner had stabbed his wife in the cheek, producing a severe but not a mortal wound. This was on April 1st. The deceased was taken to an infirmary, and was there delivered of a child on the 3rd. She was attacked with puerperal fever and died on the 12th. It was properly stated by the medical witness that there was no necessary connection between the wound and the fever. The prisoner was acquitted on the charge of murder, and his life was saved. He was found guilty of wounding with intent to murder. In another case, Eeg. V. Hi'dgson (Leeds Sum. Ass., 1876), the prisoner was charged with the manslaughter of his wife by striking her with a belt. A short time alter the blow, she fell back and died suddenly. The proximate cause of death was proved to be heart-disease, the violence not being sufficient to account for it. The prisoner was acquitted. In 1873, an inquest was held at Haslar Hospital on the body of one Rollings. The deceased was struck by a seaman and fell with his right arm under him, breaking the two bones of his forearm just above the wrist. He died rather suddenly soon after the violence, and as this did not seem adequate to account for death, a careful inspection was made, and it was then found that death had resulted from disease of the heart. Lord Hale, in remarking upon the necessity of proving that the act of a prisoner caused the death of a person, says, ' It is necessary that the death should have been occasioned by some corporeal injury done to the party by force, or by poison, or by some mechanical means which occasioned death; for although a person may, w foroconscientim^ be as guilty of murder by working on the passions or fears of another, and as certainly occasion death by such means, as if he had used a sword or pistol for the purpose, he is not the object of temporal punishment.' Several acquittals have taken place of late years in


[309/872 b22652516_0309.jp2]

WHICH OF TWO WOUNDS CAUSED DEATH? 297 cases in whicli the deaths of persons have been occasioned by terror, or dread of impending danger produced by acts of violence on the part of the prisoners, not, however, giving rise to bodily injury in the deceased. Under 14 and 15 Vict., c. 100, the necessity for tracing death to some corporeal injury appears to be practically abolished. According to sec. 4, in any future indictment for murder or manslaughter it shall not be necessary to set forth the manner or the means by which the death of the deceased was caused. This question arose in Beg. v. Heany (Gloucester Lent Ass., 1875). The prisoner was charged with the manslaughter of his wife. She was suffering from cancerous disease. In the course of an altercation, the prisoner held up a knife in a threat- ening manner, but without touching her. This produced a shock, and she died two days after, from fright. The prisoner was acquitted, as there was no distinct proof of the acceleration of death by this act. He was convicted of an assault. Which of Two Wounds caused Deaths—A man may receive tvjo wounds on provocation, at different times and from different persons, and die after receiving the second: in such a case, the course of justice may require that a medical witness should state which wound was the cause of death. A man receives during a quarrel a gunshot-wound in the shoulder. He is going on well, with a prospect of recovery, when in another quarrel he receives a severe penetrating wound in the chest or abdomen from another person, and, after lingering under the effects of these wounds, he dies. If the gunshot-wound was clearly shown to have been the cause of death, the second prisoner could not be con- victed of manslaughter; or if the stab was evidently the cause of death, the first prisoner would be acquitted on a similar charge. It might be possible for a surgeon to decide the question summarily, when, for instance, death speedily followed the second wound; and, on inspection of the body, the heart or a large vessel is discovered to have been penetrated; or, on the other hand, extensive sloughing, sufficient to account for death, might take place from the gunshot-wound, and, on inspection, the stab might be found to be of a slight nature, not involv- ing any vital parts. In either of these cases, all would depend upon the knowledge, skill, and judgment of the medical practitioner; his evidence would be so important that no correct decision could be arrived at without it; he would be, in fact, called upon substantially to distinguish the guilty from the innocent. In Reg. v. Foreman (C. C. C, Feb. 1873), this question arose. The prisoner, it was proved, had struck the deceased some severe blows on the head. A fortnight after- wards the deceased, who had partially recovered, had a fight with another man, during which he again received severe blows on his head. In another fortnight he had paralysis of the left side, and died in an hospital a few days afterwards. On inspection, a large abscess in the brain was found, which was the cause of the symptoms and death. The question was whether this abscess had arisen from the blows given by the prisoner, or from the violence sustained a fortnight afterwards. On this point there was no satisfactory medical evidence, and as the deceased had had no serious symptoms for a fortnight after the assault


[310/872 b22652516_0310.jp2]

298 WHICH OF TWO WOUNDS CAUSED DEATH? by the prisoner—in fact not until after the second fight—the jury acquitted him. On some occasions death may appear to be equally a consequence of either or both of the wounds; in which case probably both parties would be liable to a charge of manslaughter. (See ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1835, t. 2, p. 432.) The second wound, which is here supposed to have been the act of another, may be inflicted by a wounded person on himself, in an attempt at suicide, or it may have an accidental origin. The witness would then have to determine whether the wounded person died from the wound inflicted by himself or from that which he had previously received. In the Walworth murder^ which occurred in 1883, a grocer's assistant pursued a man who had stolen a parcel from a cart, and the thief took refuge in a coal-shed, followed by the assistant. The latter was stabbed by the former twice in the abdomen on the right and left of the navel. The larger wound on the left suppurated, whilst the smaller wound on the right healed at once. The man died of peritonitis. On post-mortem examination, the editor found that the suppurating wound, which had been supposed to be the fatal one, did not involve a vital part; but that the small wound on the right, made by a knife, passed upwards and backwards, transfixing the liver, and puncturing the gall-bladder. The peritonitis was consequent on the escape of bile into the abdominal cavity. There was reason to believe that the non-fatal stab was first inflicted purposely, and the second and fatal wound might possibly have been caused by the deceased rushing upon the knife, held as it were in self-defence by the thief, who has never been discovered. It is not difiScultto conceive what comphcations might arise in a trial for murder under such circumstances. It may happen that the wounded person has taken poison, and has actually died from its effects, and not from the injuries or maltreatment. Again, a wounded person may have been the subject of subsequent ill- treatment, and the question will arise—to which of the two causes his death was really due. It is to be observed of these cases that the supervening disease, the poison, or the subsequent ill-treatment, should be of such a nature as to account for sudden or rapid death; since it would be no answer to a charge of death from violence to say that there were marks of chronic disease in the body, unless it was of such a nature as to account for the sudden destruction of life under the symptoms which actually preceded death. In the medical jurispru- dence of wounds, there is probably no question which so frequently presents itself as this: it is admitted that the violence was inflicted, but it is asserted that death was due to some other cause, and the onus of proof lies on the medical evidence. Among numerous cases which occurred in England during a period of twenty years, the author found that the latent causes of death as registered in wounded persons have been chiefly inflammation of the thoracic or abdominal viscera, apoplexy, diseases of the heart and large blood-vessels, phthisis, ruptures of the stomach and bowels from disease, internal strangulation, and the rupture of deep-seated abscesses. In some of these cases the person was in a good state of health up to the time of the violence, and in others


[311/872 b22652516_0311.jp2]

DEATH FROM SLIGHT PERSONAL INJURIES. 299 there was merely a slight indisposition. The history was nearly the same in all: it was only by careful conduct on the part of the medical witnesses that the true cause of death was ascertained. It is obvious that questions of malapraxis and life insurance, giving rise to civil actions, may have a close relation to this subject. Death following Slight Personal Injuries.— An imputation has occa- sionally been thrown on the master of a school, when a, boy has died soon after he has been punished in an ordinary way, and when there has been no suggestion that an undue amount of violence was used. In such cases there has been commonly some unhealthy state of the body to explain the fatal result. When the disease that gives rise to doubt is seated in a part remote from that which sustained the violence, all that is required is that the examination of the body should be conducted with ordinary care. If the disease should happen to be in the part injured (the head or chest), the case is more perplexing. The difficulty can then be removed only by attentively considering the usual consequences of such injuries. The violence may have been too slight to account for the diseased appearance; and the disease itself, although situated in the part injured, may be regarded as an unusual consequence of such an injury. On the other hand, the presence of chronic disease will form no exculpation of acts of violence of this nature. In Beg. v. Eopley (Lewes Aut. Ass., 1860), there was chronic disease of long standing in the brain of the deceased boy, but it was proved that he was quite well and suffered from no unusual symptoms up to the time that a violent flogging was inflicted, and that this was followed by death in less than three hours from the commencement of the violence. It was not here a question even of acceleration, for the deceased might have lived for years in spite of the existence of this chronic disease. In some cases slight blows have been followed by fatal consequences, even when no disease existed to account for the result. Annan de- scribes a case in which a healthy girl of four received a shght blow on the shin, about three inches below the knee, from the shaft of a wheel- barrow. There was pain, but no external mark of violence. The injury was considered to be so slight as to require no special treatment. On the following day there was increased pain. Severe constitutional symptoms set in, and the child died on the fourth day. (' Med. Times,' 1854, ii. p. 238.) Death from Wounds after long periods.—Certain kinds of injuries are not immediately followed by serious consequences; but a wounded person may die after a longer or shorter period of time, and his death may be as much a consequence of the injury as if it had taken place on the spot. The aggressor, however, is just as responsible as if the deceased had been directly killed by his violence, provided the fatal result can be traced to the usual and probable consequences of the injury. Wounds of the head are especially liable to cause death insidiously— the wounded person may in the first instance recover—he may appear to be going on well, when, without any obvious cause, he suddenly dies. It is scarcely necessary to observe that, in general, an exami- nation of the body will suffice to determine whether death is to be


[312/872 b22652516_0312.jp2]

300 DEATH FROM WOUNDS AFTER LONG PERIODS. ascribed to the wound or not. In severe injuries affecting the spinal marrow, death is not an immediate consequence, unless that part of the organ which is above the origin of the phrenic nerves (supplying the diaphragm) is wounded. Injuries affecting the lower portion of the spinal column do not commonly prove fatal until after some days or weeks; but the symptoms manifested by the patient during life, as well as the appearances observed in the body after death, will sufficiently connect the injury with that event. Death may follow a wound, and be a consequence of that wound, at almost any period after its infliction. It is necessary, however, in order to maintain a charge of homicide, that death should be strictly and clearly traceable to the injury, and not be dependent on any other cause. A doubt on this point must, of course, lead to an acquittal of the accused. Many cases might be quoted in illustration of the length of time which may elapse before death takes place from certain kinds of in- juries, the injured person having ultimately fallen a victim to their indirect consequences. A case is related by Astley Cooper, of a gentle- man who died from the effects of an injury to the head received about two years previously. The connection of death with the wound was clearly made out by the continuance of the symptoms of cerebral dis- turbance during the long period which he survived. Another case is mentioned by Iloffbauer, in which a person died from the effects of concussion of the brain as the result of an injury received eleven years before. (' Ueber die Kopfverletzungen,' 1842, p. 57.) There is a rule in our law relative to the period at which a person dies from a wound—namely, that the assailant shall not be adjudged guilty of murder, unless death takes place within a year and a day after the infliction of the wound. To make the killing murder, the death must follow within a year and a day after the stroke or other cause of it. In practice, the existence of this rule is of little import- ance, but in principle it is erroneous. Most wounds leading to death generally destroy life within two or three months after their infliction ; sometimes the person does not die for five or six months; and, in more rare instances, death does not ensue until after the lapse of twelve months, or even several years. These protracted cases occur especially in respect to injuries of the head and chest. In Reg. v. Creuse (Shrews- bury Sum. Ass., 1873), the prisoner was charged with the murder of a policeman (Lloyd), by knocking him down and kicking him on the chest and abdomen, on June 20th, 1872. Lloyd appeared to be much exhausted, but at first no serious injury was apprehended. The assailant was brought before the magistrates, and imprisoned for the assault. The day after the assault, Lloyd began to spit blood, but he continued to do duty until July 9th following. He then got gradually worse, and died on June 8th, 1873, from the effects of the violence in- flicted on him nearly a year previously. Had the deceased lived thirteen days longer, the prisoner could not have been indicted for murder, as a year and a day would have elapsed after the stroke causing death. As it was, the jury found the prisoner guilty of manslaughter, Stcondary Causes of Death.—A person who recovers from the im-


[313/872 b22652516_0313.jp2]

SECONDARY CAUSES OF DEATH. 301 mediate effects of a wound may die from fever, inflammation or its consequences, pyaemia, erysipelas, delirium tremens, tetanus, or gan- grene ; or from an operation required during the treatment of a wound. These are what may be called secondary causes of death, or secondary fatal consequences of a wound. The power of decid- ing on the responsibility of an accused person for an event which depends only in an indirect manner on an injury originally inflicted by him, rests, of course, with the authorities of the law. But it is impossible that they can decide so difficult and nice a question in the absence of satisfactory medical evidence; and, on the other hand, it is right that a medical witness should understand the importance of the duty here required of him. F^oemia or erysipelas may follow many kinds of serious wounds, and in some few instances be distinctly traceable to them; but, in others, the constitution of a person may be so broken up by dissipated habits as to render a wound fatal which in a healthy subject might have run through its course mildly, and have healed. When the pyaemia or erysipelas can be traced to a wound, and there is no other apparent cause of aggravation to which either of these disordered states of the body can be attributed, they can scarcely be regarded by a medical practitioner as unexpected and unusual consequences, especially when the injury is extensive, and seated in certain parts of the body, as in the scalp. If death take place under these circumstances, the prisoner will be held as much responsible for the result as if the wound had proved directly mortal. This prin- ciple has been frequenth'' admitted by our law, and, indeed, were it otherwise, many reckless offenders would escape, and many lives would be sacrificed with impunity. It is, however, difficult to lay down general rules upon a subject which is liable to vary in its re- lations in every case ; but when a wound is not serious, and the secondary cause of death is evidently due to constitutional peculiarities from acquired habits of dissipation, the ends of justice are probably fully answered by an acquittal; in fact, such cases do not often pass beyond a coroner's inquest. • The secondary causes of death may be arranged under the following heads:— 1. The cause is unavoidable.—Of this kind are tetanus, following laceration of tendinous and nervous structures; erysipelas, following lacerated wounds of the scalp; peritoneal inflammation, following blows on the abdomen with or without rupture of the bladder or intestines, and effusion of their contents ; strangulation of the intestines (phrenic hernia), following rupture of the diaphragm; and others of a like nature. Here, supposing proper medical treatment and regimen to have been pursued, the secondary cause of death was unavoidable, and the fatal result certain. 2. The cause avoidable by good medical treatment.—There are, it is obvious, many kinds of wounds which, if properly treated in the first instance, may be healed and the patient recover, but when improperly treated they prove fatal. In the latter case it will be a question for a witness to determine how far the treatment aggravated the eff'ects


[314/872 b22652516_0314.jp2]

302 COMPARATIVE SKILL IN TREATMENT, of the violence, and, from his answer to this, the jury may have to decide on the degree of criminahty which attaches to the accused. Let us suppose, for instance, that an ignorant person has removed a clot of blood, which sealed up the extremity of a blood-vessel, in con- sequence of which fatal bleeding has ensued, or that he has caused death by unnecessarily interfering with a penetrating wound of the chest or abdomen: it would scarcely be just to hold the aggressor responsible, since, but for the gross ignorance and unskilfulness of his attendant, the wounded person might have recovered from the effects of the wound. When death is really traceable to the negligence or unskilfulness ©f a surgeon who is called to attend on a wounded person, this circumstance ought to be, and commonly is, admitted in mitigation, supposing that the wound was not originally of a mortal nature. Lord Hale observes, 'It is sufficient to constitute murder, that the party dies of the wound given by the prisoner, although the wound was not originally mortal, but became so in consequence of negligence or unskilful treatment; but it is otherwise where death arises, not from the wound, but from unskilful applications or opera- tions used for the purpose of curing it.' The medical jurist will perceive that a very nice distinction is here drawn by this great judge between death as it results from a wound rendered mortal by improper treat- ment, and death as it results from improper treatment irrespective of the wound. In the majority of cases such a distinction could scarcely be established, except upon speculative grounds, and in no case, prob- ably, would there be any accordance in the opinions of medical wit- nesses. In sHght and unimportant wounds, it might not be difficult to distinguish the effects resulting from bad treatment from those connected with the wound, but there can be few cases of severe injury to the person, wherein a distinction of this nature could be safely made; and the probability is that no conviction for murder would now take place if the medical evidence showed that the injury was not originally mortal, but only became so by unskilful or improper treatment, in such a case, it would be impossible to ascribe death to the wound, or to its usual or probable consequences ; and without this it is not easy to perceive on what priuciple an aggressor could be made responsible for the result. 3. Comparative skill in treatment.—If death has been caused by a wound, the responsibility of an aggressor is not altered by the allega- tion that, under more favourable circumstances and with more skilful treatment, a fatal result might have been averted. At the same time, it is obvious that a serious responsibility is thrown on practitioners who undertake the management of cases of criminal wounding. Any deviation from ordinary practice should therefore be made with the greatest caution, since novelties in practice will, in the event of a fatal result, form one of the best grounds of defence in the hands of a prisoner's counsel. On these occasions every point connected with the surgical treatment will be the subject of rigorous inquiry and adverse professional criticism. In the case of a severe lacerated wound in the hand or foot, followed by fatal tetanus, it may be said that the wounded


[315/872 b22652516_0315.jp2]

WOUNDS. DEATH FROM IMPRUDENCE OR NEGLECT. person would not have died had amputation been at once performed. In this instance, however, a practitioner may justify himself by show- ing, either that the injury was too slight to require amputation, or that the health or other circumstances connected with the deceased would not allow of its being performed with any reasonable hope of success. On the other hand, if the practitioner performed amputation, and the patient died, then it would be urged that the operation was premature, or wholly unjustifiable, and that it had caused death. Here the sur- geon is bound to show that the operation was necessary according to the ordinary rules of practice. The treatment of severe incised wounds of the throat, when the windpipe is involved, sometimes places a surgeon in an embarrassing position. If the wound is left open, death may take place from bleeding ; if it be prematurely closed, Iblood may be effused into the windpipe and cause death by suffocation. 4. The cause avoidable but for imprudence or neglect on the part of the wounded person.—A man who has been severely wounded in a quarrel may obstinately refuse medical assistance, or he may insist upon taking exercise, or using an improper diet, contrary to the advice of his medical attendant; or by other imprudent practices, he may thwart the best-conceived plans for his recovery. Let us take a com- mon case as an illustration. A man receives a blow on the head in a pugilistic combat, from the first effects of which he recovers, but, after having received surgical assistance, he indulges in excessive drinking, and dies. The aggressor is tried on a charge of manslaughter, and found guilty. Death under these circumstances is commonly attributed by the medical witness to effusion of blood on the brain ; but it cannot be denied that the excitement produced by intoxicating liquors will sometimes satisfactorily account for the fatal symptoms. (See Beg. v. Saxon, p. 296, ante.) In the case which we are here supposing, such an admission might be made, and the prisoner receive the benefit of it; for the imprudence or negligence of a wounded person ought not, morally speaking, to be considered as adding weight to the offence of the aggressor. If the symptoms were from the first unfavourable, or the wound likely to prove mortal, circumstances of this kind could not be received in mitigation. Our judges have shown themselves at all times unwilling to admit them. The legal responsibility of the assailant is the same, whether the deceased died on the spot, or some days, weeks, or months afterwards, unless it can be distinctly proved that his death was immediately connected with the imprudence or excess of which he was guilty, and wholly independent of the wound. But, although a prisoner should be found guilty of manslaughter under these circumstances, the punishment is so adjusted by our law as to leave a considerable discretionary power in the hands of a judge. This is, indeed, tantamount to a direct legal provision, comprehending each different shade of guilt; a man is held responsible for a wound rendered accidentally mortal by events over which he could have had no control, but which in themselves ought to be regarded as in some degree exculpatory. The punishment attached to his offence may be severe or slight, according to the representation made by a medical


[316/872 b22652516_0316.jp2]

304 ABNORMAL STATES OF THE BODY. witness of the circumstances which rendered the wound mortal; if he neglect to state the full influence of imprudence or excess on the part of the wounded person, where either has existed, over the progress of the wound, he may cause the prisoner to be punished with undue severity. The humanity of our judges is such that, when medical evidence is clear and consistent on a point of this nature, and there are no circumstances in aggravation, they commonly pass a mild sentence. The neglect to call in a medical practitioner, or the refusal to receive medical advice, will not, however, according to the decision in Reg. v. Thomas (Gloucester Aut. Ass., 1841), be considered a miti- gatory circumstance in favour of the prisoner, even although the wound was susceptible of being cured. A man may receive a lacerated wound of a hmb, which is followed by tetanus or gangrene, and thus proves fatal; he may have declined receiving medical advice, or have obsti- nately refused amputation, although proposed by his medical attendant. This would not operate as a mitigatory circumstance on the part of an assailant, because a wounded person is not compelled to call for medical assistance, or to submit to an operation, while a medical witness could not always be in a position to swear that the operation would have certainly saved his life ; he can merely state that it might have afforded him a better chance of recovery. Again, a person may receive a blow on the head producing fracture, with great depression of bone and symptoms of compression of the brain : a surgeon may propose the operation of trephining to elevate the depressed bone, but the friends of the wounded man may not permit the operation to be performed. In such a case, the line of duty of the witness will be to state the facts to the court, and it is probable that, in the event of conviction, there would be some mitigation of punishment; because such an injury, if left to itself, must in general prove mortal, and no doubt could exist in the mind of any surgeon as to the absolute necessity for the operation. But the neglect or improper conduct of a person who receives a wound thus rendered fatal does not exculpate the aggressor. The crime is either murder or manslaughter. 5. The cause avoidable hut for an abnormal or unhealthy state of the body of the wounded person.—Wounds which are comparatively slight sometimes prove indirectly fatal, owing to the person being in an unhealthy condition at the time of their infliction. In bad constitutions, compound fractures or slight wounds, which in a healthy person would have a favourable termination, are followed by gangrene, pyaemia, or erysipelas, proving fatal. Here the responsibility of an assailant for the death may become reduced, so that, although found guilty of man- slaughter, a mild punishment might be inflicted. The consequence may be, medically speaking, unusual or unexpected, and, but for circumstances wholly independent of the act of the accused, would not have been hkely to destroy life. In general, in the absence of mahce, this appears to be the point to which the law closely looks, in order to make out the responsibility of the accused—namely, that the fatal secondary cause must be something not unusual or unexpected as a consequence of the particular injury. The medico-legal question pre-


[317/872 b22652516_0317.jp2]

ABNORMAL STATES OF THE BODY. sents itself under this form—Would the same amount of injury have been likely to cause death in a person of ordinary health and vigour? A man otherwise healthy, labouring under rupture, may receive a blow- on the groin, attended with laceration of the intestine, gangrene, and death; another with a calculus in the kidney may be struck in the loins and die, in consequence of the calculus perforating the blood- vessels and causing fatal bleeding or subsequent inflammation. In these cases the effects of the violence must be regarded as something unexpected: it would not have produced serious mischief in an ordinarily healthy person, and hence the responsibihty of an assailant becomes much diminished. The crime is undoubtedly manslaughter, but the punishment may be of a lenient description. A defence of this kind will, however, be limited by circumstances. A case is reported, in which a Dr. Fabricius was tried at the Old Bailey for the murder of his servant by striking her a blow behind the ear whereby a large abscess, situated at that part, was ruptured, and this ultimately caused her death. The chief question at the trial was, whether the deceased had died from the effects of the violence, or from the disease under which she was at that time labouring. The doctor ingeniously urged in his defence that he had struck the blow merely for the purpose of opening the abscess. The jury, however, did not agree in taking this professional view of the matter, and they found him guilty of man- slaughter. It must be evident that there exist numerous internal diseases, such as aneurism and various morbid affections of the heart and brain, which are liable to be rendered fatal by slight external violence. The law, as apphed to these cases, is thus stated by Lord Hale : ' It is sufficient to prove that the death of a person was accelerated by the malicious act of the prisoner, although the former laboured under a mortal disease at the time of the act.' In those cases in which a slight degree of violence has been followed by fatal consequences, it is for a jury to decide, under all the circumstances, upon the actual and specific inten- tion of the prisoner at the time of the act which occasioned death. According to Starkie, ' it seems that in general, notwithstanding any facts which tend to excuse or alleviate the act of the prisoner, if it be proved that he was actuated by prepense and deliberate malice, and that the particular occasion and circumstances upon which he relies were sought for and taken advantage of merely with a view to qualify actual malice, in pursuance of a preconceived scheme of destruction, the offence will amount to murder.' In most of these cases there is an absence of intention to destroy life, but the nature of the wound, as well as the means by which it was inflicted, will often suffice to show the intention of the prisoner. An accurate description of the injury, if slight, may afford strong evidence in favour of the accused, since the law does not so much regard the means used by him to perpetrate the violence, as the actual intention to kill, or to do great bodily harm. Serious injury, causing death by secondary consequences, will admit of no exculpation when an assailant was aware, or ought to have been aware, of the condition of the person whom he struck. Thus X


[318/872 b22652516_0318.jp2]

3o6 WOUNDS. ABNORMAL CONDITIONS. if a person notoriously ill, or a woman while pregnant, be maltreated, and death ensue from a secondary cause, the assailant will be held responsible ; because he ought to know that violence of any kind to persons so situated must be attended with dangerous consequences. So, if the person maltreated be an infant or a decrepit old man, or one labouring under a mortal disease, it is notorious that a comparatively slight degree of violence will destroy life in these cases, and the prisoner would properly be held responsible. A wound which accele- rates death causes death, and may therefore render the aggressor responsible for murder or manslaughter, according to the circumstances. The Commissioners appointed to define the criminal law on the subject of homicide thus express themselves : ' Art. 3. It is homicide, although the effect of the injury he merely to accelerate the death of one labouring under some previous injury or infirmity, or although, if timely remedies or skilful treatment had been appHed, death might have been prevented.' This is comformable to the decisions of our judges. According to Lord Hale, if a man has a disease which in all likelihood would terminate his life in a short time, and another gives him a wound or hurt which hastens his death, this is such a killing as constitutes murder. 6. Abnormal Conditions.—When an assailant could not have been aware of the existence of a diseased or abnormal condition of parts in the wounded person, the question is somewhat different. In many persons the skull is preternaturally thin, and in most persons it is so in those places corresponding to the Pacchionian bodies. In a case of this kind a moderate blow on the head might cause fracture, accom- panied by effusion of blood, depression of bone, or subsequent inflam- mation of the brain and its membranes, any of which causes might prove fatal. In some persons, all the bones of the body are unusually brittle, so that they are fractured by the slightest force. Inflammation, gangrene, and death may follow, when no considerable violence has been used; but these being unexpected consequences, and depending on an abnormal condition of parts unknown to the prisoner, his respon- sibility may not, caeteris paribus, be so great as under other circum- stances. This condition of the bones can be determined only by a medical practitioner. Facts of this kind show that the degree of violence used in an assault cannot always be measured by the effects, unless a careful examination of the injured part is previously made. 7. Difficulty of proof in death from secondary causes.—When a per- son is charged with having caused the death of another through violence terminating in some fatal disease, the case often admits of a skilful defence, and this in proportion to the length of time after the violence at which the deceased dies. This disease, it may be urged, is liable to appear in all persons, even the most healthy ; or it may arise from causes unconnected with the violence. In admitting these points, it must be remembered that death may be proved to have been indirectly a consequence of the wound by the facts: (1) that the supervention of the secondary cause, although not a common event, lay in the natural course of things; (2) that there did not exist any accidental circumstances which were likely to have given rise to this


[319/872 b22652516_0319.jp2]

DEATH FROM TETANUS. secondary cause independently of the wound. The proof of the first point amounts to nothing, unless the evidence on the second point is conclusive. CHAPTER 30. WOUNDS INDTEECTLY FATAL.—TETANUS FOLLOWING WOUNDS.—ERYSIPELAS.— DELIRIUM TREMENS.—GANGRENE.—DEATH FROM SURGICAL OPERATIONS. ANESTHETICS.—PRIMARY AND SECONDARY CAUSES OF DEATH.—UNSKILFDL- NESS IN OPERATIONS.—PYEMIA.—MEDICAL RESPONSIBILITY IN REFERENCE TO OPERATIONS.—ACTIONS FOR MALAPRAXIS. Tetanus following Wounds.—Tetanus frequently presents itself as a secondary fatal consequence of wounds, especially of those which are lacerated or contused, and affect nervous or tendinous structures. It has often occurred as a result of slight bruises or lacerations, when the injury was so slight as to excite no alarm; and it is a disease which gives no warning of its appearance. Tetanus may come on sponta- neously, i.e. independently of the existence of any wound on the body. Cases have been brought into the London hospitals, in which the only cause of this disease appeared to be exposure to cold or wet, or, in some instances, exposure to a current of air. It is scarcely possible to distinguish, by the symptoms, tetanus from wounds (traumatic) from that which occurs spontaneously as a result of natural causes (idiopathic). In endeavouring to connect its appearance with a particular wound or personal injury, it should be observed (1) whether there were any symptoms indicative of it before the maltreatment; (2) whether any probable cause could have intervened to produce it, between the time of its appearance and the time at which the violence was inflicted ; (3) whether the deceased ever ralHed from the effects of the violence. The time at which tetanus usually makes its appearance, when it is the result of a wound, is from the third to the sixth day; but it may not appear until three or four weeks after the injury, and the exciting cause may still be traced to the wound, which may have healed. When resulting from a wound, it is generally fatal. A medical practitioner is bound to exercise great caution before he pronounces an opinion that a fatal attack of tetanus has arisen either from spontaneous causes, or from slight blows or personal injuries. A rigorous inquiry should be made into all the attendant circumstances. Slight punctured wounds, operating as a cause of tetanus, have been overlooked or only discovered by accident after death, and it is highly probable that many cases have been set down as idiopathic tetanus in which, by proper inquiry, the disease might have been traced to a wound or some personal injury. In one instance the tetanus was at first considered to be idiopathic ; but shortly before death a small black mark was observed on the thumb-nail. On making inquiry, it was found that a few days previously to the attack a splinter of wood had


[320/872 b22652516_0320.jp2]

3o8 WOUNDS. DEATH FROM ERYSIPELAS. accidentally penetrated the thumb. The patient attached so little importance to the accident that he did not mention the circumstance to his medical attendant. This was no doubt the cause of the disease. (For two similar cases, see ' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1872, ii. p. 594.) Many trials for murder and manslaughter have occurred in this country in which tetanus was the immediate cause of death; and the defence has generally rested upon the probable origin of the disease from accidental causes. Erysipelas, like tetanus, may be a fatal result of slight injuries. Wounds affecting the scalp are hable to be followed by this disease. Burns and scalds sometimes prove fatal through this secondary cause. Some persons are particularly prone to erysipelatous inflammation, and thus wounds comparatively slight may have a fatal termination. When a wounded person has died from this disease, an assailant cannot be made responsible for the fatal result, unless the erysipelas is clearly traced to the injury. The medical facts that the person assaulted has never recovered from the effects of the violence, and that the inflam- mation set up has suddenly assumed an erysipelatous character, are sufficient to establish this connection. If there has been recovery, and an interval of some days has elapsed, a doubt may arise respecting the connection of the erysipelas with the violence inflicted. This disease is occasionally idiopathic, i.e. it appears like tetanus without any assignable cause. In Reg. v. Jones (Monmouth Lent Ass., 1873), the prisoner, a collier, was convicted of manslaughter under the following circumstances: the prisoner was fighting with another man, and the deceased, a woman, endeavoured to part them. The prisoner fixed his teeth savagely on her thumb, and bit her severely. The wound was poulticed. It was not until the fourth day that she had medical advice. Erysipelas had then commenced, and had caused great swell- ing of the limb up to the shoulder. She died in three weeks. The medical evidence was to the effect that she had died of erysipelas from the wound, but the fatal result was in a great measure due to an impaired state of health from excessive drinking. The prisoner was, notwithstanding, found guilty. It is sometimes difficult to establish the connection of erysipelas with a wound, especially when the disease occurs some time after its infliction, and in a remote part of the body not implicated in the wound. When this connection cannot be distinctly made out, there will be an acquittal. Delirium tremens is a disease which frequently presents itself as a secondary consequence of injuries in persons of intemperate habits. Whether the injury be slight or severe, this disease may equally supervene and prove fatal. It is observed occasionally as a consequence of operations required for the treatment of wounded persons. The remarks made at p. 304 upon the influence of unhealthy constitutions on wounds, apply with especial force to cases of this description. Death from Surgical Operations.—In the treatment of wounds, surgical operations are frequently resorted to, and a wounded person may die, either during the performance of an operation, or from its


[321/872 b22652516_0321.jp2]

DEATH FROM SURGICAL OPERATIONS. 309 consequences. A question will thence arise, whether the person who inflicted the wound should be held responsible for the fatal result. The law regards a surgical operation as part of the treatment, and if undertaken bona fide, and performed with reasonable care and skill, the aggressor will be held responsible, whatever may be the result. The necessity for the operation, and the mode of performing it, will be left to the operator's judgment. As the defence may turn upon the operation having been performed unnecessarily, and in a bungling and unskilful manner, it will be right for a practitioner, if possible, to defer it until he has had the advice and assistance of other practitioners. According to Lord Hale, if death takes place from an unskilful opera- tion, performed for the cure of a wound, and not from the wound, the responsibility of the prisoner ceases; but he does not appear to have considered that death may take place as a consequence of the most skilful operation required for the treatment of a wound, and yet be wholly independent of the wound itself. If the operation has been performed by the medical witness himself, and the necessity for its performance is questioned by counsel for the prisoner, it is open to the witness to give the requisite explanation in his evidence. It would appear from a case tried before Shee, J., that the necessity for an operation will not be assumed; but if called in question, it must be proved by witnesses for the prosecution. In Beg. V. Moreland (C. C. C, Sept. 1865), the prisoner threw the deceased on the ground and fractured his leg. The hmb was amputated, and the man subsequently died. Counsel for the prisoner asked the surgeon from the hospital, who spoke to the death of the deceased, whether an operation was really necessary. The witness said he could not tell, as he had not had charge of the case previous to the operation. Counsel then raised the question whether prisoner or the doctors had caused the man's death. The counsel for the prosecution suggested that the court might accept as a fact that amputation would not have been performed had it not been necessary; but the judge said that would not do. They must deal with the case on the evidence before them. He then observed to the jury that, although undoubtedly am- putation would not be adopted at such a place as the London Hospital without the necessity for it, yet evidence to that effect must be before them on oath. They could not act on what they had every reason to believe; therefore they must acquit the prisoner. The failure of justice in this case rested with those who were concerned for the prosecution. The operator, who could probably have satisfied the court that he had not cut off the wrong leg, and that there were good reasons for performing the operation, was not called as a witness; but in his place a witness was summoned who could not answer these necessary questions. Death is by no means an unusual result of severe operations, the secondary consequences under which the patient may die being very numerous even when the case is skilfully managed. Sometimes the patient will die on the table, although but little blood may have been lost. Fear, pain, and sudden shock to the nervous system have caused


[322/872 b22652516_0322.jp2]

3IO WOUNDS. DEATH FROM SURGICAL OPERATIONS. death under these circumstances. The most common indirect causes of death after severe operations are secondary haemorrhage, erysipelas, tetanus, dehrium tremens, pyaemia, and gangrene of the stump. Should an operation be unnecessarily or unskilfully performed, the responsibility of an aggressor would, it is presumed, cease, if the death of a wounded person could be clearly traced to it. Thus if, in care- lessly bleeding, the brachial artery should be laid open (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1834, t 2, p. 445), or if, in performing amputation, a large artery be improperly secured, so that the patient in either case dies from loss of blood, the prisoner could not be equitably held responsible; because it would be punishing him for an event depending on the unskilfulness of a medical practitioner. According to Piatt, B., a prisoner will be held responsible, if the original wound were likely to produce death, although unskilfully treated. Supposing the bleeding or amputation to be performed with ordinary care and skill, and yet, in the one case, inflammation of the veins, and in the other erysipelas, tetanus, gangrene, or fever should destroy life, the prisoner will be liable for the consequences. The practice of the law is strictly consistent with justice. Should the operation be considered to be absolutely required for the treatment of a wound, which, according to all probability, would prove mortal without it; should it be performed with ordinary skill, and still death ensue as a direct or indirect consequence,—it is only just that the person who inflicted the injury should be held responsible for the result. It is presumed in these cases that, were the patient left to himself, he would in all probability die from the effects of the wound. If, therefore, a surgeon, knowing that an operation would give a chance of saving hfe on such an occasion, did not perform it, it might be contended, in the defence, that the deceased had died, not from the wound, but from the incompetency and neglect of his medical attendant. Hence it follows that if, during this necessary treatment, unforeseen though not unusual causes cut life short, no exculpation should be admitted, if it went to attack the best-directed efforts made for the preservation of life. (See 'Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1835, t. 1, p. 231.) If an operation is rendered necessary by reason of the improper treatment of the wound, the responsibility of an assailant for a fatal result ceases. In another part of this work (p. 30) we have referred to the case of Kelly, who was tried for the murder of Talbot. {Reg. v. Kelly, Dublin Commis. Court, Nov. 1871.) The facts of this case, although made a subject of the most violent contention in a medical, legal, and pohtical view, were really of a very simple kind. On July 12, the deceased received a pistol-shot wound at the back of his neck, and died from the effiects on July 16. The bullet fractured and splintered the atlas, wounding and crushing the soft parts of the neck, and leading to the formation of an abscess in this part. The actual cause of death was inflammation of the spinal cord and its membranes. Stokes, who attended the deceased, considered it necessary to enlarge the wound for the purpose of removing the bullet, which was then supposed to be lying within reach. In this operation a small artery (the occipital) was


[323/872 b22652516_0323.jp2]

DEATH FROM ANAESTHETICS IN OPERATIONS. 31I divided, but the quantity of blood lost was small; the bleeding was stopped by compression, and this bleeding had no influence in causing death. The defence was that the wound would not have proved fatal but for the bad surgical treatment; that the probing of the wound was unnecessary, and that it was unskilfully performed. There was the evidence of experts on both sides; but the facts proved, apart from the opinions expressed, could leave no reasonable doubt that Stokes had treated the case with bona fides and with competent skill. The prisoner was positively identified by the deceased and others, and yet upon this evidence the jury returned a verdict of not guilty. (See 'Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1871, ii. p. 716.) The failure of justice in this case appears to have been chiefly owing to the fact that the jury were allowed to form their opinions on the surgical treatment pursued, whereas the rule of law is clear as to responsibility; and the only question which should have been submitted to them was, whether the prisoner was or was not the man who fired the pistol-shot. The English practice, as already quoted above, is that if a man unlawfully inflicts a dangerous wound on another, and the wounded person, after being treated by qualified practitioners acting with bona fides, and applying themselves with the best of their ability to the case, dies of the wound, the man inflicting it is really guilty of murder, even although an erroneous treatment of the case by the practitioner may have been the cause of death. In fact, under no other rule would a medical man be safe in dealing with a case of criminal wounding. If Kelly's case were taken as a precedent, no surgical treatment should be adopted under these circumstances. The wound should be allowed to take its mortal course. Death from An (Esthetics in Surgical Operations.—^In a large number of operations it is now the general practice among surgeons to admin- ister chloroform, ether, or other anaesthetics, not only to allay pain, .but to prevent that exhaustion to the patient which is likely to arise from protracted surgical proceedings. In spite of care on the part of the operator, these vapours are liable to destroy life in an unexpected manner, and the patient may die either before the operation is com- menced, or during its performance. The facts may leave no doubt that the wounded person died from the anassthetic, and not from the wound or the operation. On inspection of the body, the heart may be found in an unhealthy state, a fact which is usually considered sufiBcient to account for the fatal effects of chloroform vapour. In a case of this kind, what becomes of the responsibility of the person who inflicted the original wound? No decision, so far as we know, has ever been given on this point. Was the use of chloroform vapour in a professional view a necessary part of the treatment ? Was it skilfully and properly administered ? Could the diseased condition of the heart which rendered the eff'ects of the vapour more fatal than usual have been detected by the operator, so as to show the impropriety of admin- istering it in this case? These questions should receive satisfactory answers before the aggressor is rendered responsible for death under such peculiar circumstances.


[324/872 b22652516_0324.jp2]

312 WOUNDS. OPERATION UNDER A MISTAKEN OPINION. An action was brought against a medical man (Ahsolom v. Statham, Q. B., Nov. 1867) for forcibly administering chloroform to the plaintiff against her will, and extracting six of her teeth; also for careless and unskilful treatment, whereby her health was injured. The medical evidence showed that the woman had consented to the operation, and that it had been properly performed; also that her health had sustained no injury by the chloroform or the operation, and that most of her symptoms were due to hysteria. Cockburn, C.J., in summing up the case, said that the two charges or complaints were entirely distinct and different—one being for an assault, and the other for malpractice. The law was clear as to both. No surgeon had a right to perform any operation against the will of the patient, so loiiq as the patient preserved consciousness and will; and if, therefore, the jury believed the plaintiff's story, then she was entitled to a verdict, although the amount of the damages would depend upon their impression as to the extent of the injury. Then as to the other ground of complaint, the law was equally clear, that every medical practitioner was bound to bring a reasonable amount of skill and care to the performance of the duty he undertook. The jury found for the defendant on both grounds. This shows the state of the law in reference to the responsibility of medical men who undertake operations under anaesthetics. But there is another form in which a question of medical respon- sibility may present itself. This is illustrated in the case of Lamb V. Barton and Bennett (Wicklow Sum. Ass., 1873). This was an action by a widow to recover damages for the death of her husband under chloroform by reason of the negligence and unskilfulness of the surgeons in administering it. Amputation was rendered necessary by an accident; chloroform was administered; and the man died in five minutes, before the operation could be performed. The proof of negligence failed, and a verdict was returned for the defendants. ('Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1873, ii. p. 160.) By an operation being absolutely required, are we to understand that it is necessary to preserve life, i.e. that the wound will probablj'' prove fatal without it ? Unless it could be sworn that the treatment was required, in the judgment of the surgeon, for the preservation of life from the injury inflicted, it is doubtful whether, in the event of death occurring from such operation, the assailant would be held responsible for the fatal result. From cases hitherto decided, it would appear that the law regards three circumstances in death following surgical opera- tions : first, the necessity of the operation itself; second, the competency of the operator; and third, whether the wound would be Hkely to prove mortal without it. Operations under a Mistaken Opinion.—It may happen that the wound is not of a mortal nature, and that, although an operation was skilfully performed, it was not necessary to save life; in other words, the wounded person may die from the immediate results of a serious operation, perlormed under a mistaken \'iew of the case. A cancerous tumour has been occasionally mistaken for aneurism; or an artery has


[325/872 b22652516_0325.jp2]

DEATH FROM PYEMIA. been secured, and death has followed. A case occurred in which the carotid artery was tied; and another in which the operation was per- formed on the common iliac artery for supposed aneurisms : in both of these instances the patients sank, and after death the tumours were proved not to have been aneurismal. The operations were not neces- sary, they proved fatal, and they had been performed under a mistake. In a case reported by Syme, the carotid artery was tied, and the patient died in a few days from loss of blood. After death it was found that the tumour was not an aneurism, but a cyst. (' Dub. Med. Press.,' 1847, p. 302.) Let us assume that a man labouring under a slight aneurism of a large artery receives a blow on the part, the tumour gradually increases, 1 and is mistaken for an abscess by three or four surgeons, whose pro- fessional standing would prevent their general competency from being questioned. Under a wrong diagnosis, it is opened, and the patient dies on the spot. In such a case it would be unjust to make the aggressor liable; for, even admitting that the aneurism had resulted from the blow, and that a competent surgeon acted with lona fides, the treatment would be unskilful, and the case would fall under the rule laid down by Lord Hale {ante, p. 302). The real facts, however, may not transpire until after the death of the wounded person; and it may . then be alleged by a prisoner's co-unsel that the operation was not necessary to save life, and that the wounded man might have recovered without it. From the ruling of our judges on various occasions in which this question has arisen, it would appear that the relative degree I of skill possessed by medical men is not a question for a jury in a criminal case ; although in a ci^al case, as in an action for malapraxis, the whole of the medical facts are invariably submitted to their judg- ment. This difference can only be justified by the assumption that a man who inflicts a wound must take all the consequences—good or bad. No operation would have been required but for the injury, and the prisoner ought not to escape on account of want of skill in a, ■ surgeon, or of a mistake made by a skilful operator. It was decided in the cases of Rex v. Quain and Eeg. v. Pym, that, although the I indictment alleged that the deceased died of the wound, while in fact he died from the results of an operation, yet it was good in point of law. When a wounded person is taken to an hospital in which gangrene I or erysipelas is spreading, and he is attacked by one of these diseases before or after the performance of an operation, and dies, a prisoner may be held responsible for the fatal result. It might be contended that the transportation of the wounded man to such a locality was not absolutely necessary for his treatment, or for the preservation of his life, and that he would not have died but for the accidental presence of an infectious disease. Cases of this kind cannot easily be determined by any general rules. Fyoemia.—In addition to erysipelas and tetanus, there is another cause of death which is Hable to follow personal injuries and opera- tions, namely 'pycemia^ or the introduction of pus into the blood by


[326/872 b22652516_0326.jp2]

314 WOUNDS. MEDICAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR OPERATIONS. absorption or by the mouths of divided blood-vessels. The purulent matter acts as a poison. According to Wilks's observations, pyaemia is seldom observed after superficial injuries during the process of healing, or after wounds resulting from simple operations; but it occurs fre- quently when a bone is involved, either from the injury or as the result of an operation. Inflammation of the cellular membrane surrounding bone is a condition highly favourable to its occurrence. The medical witness must remember that pyaemia, like tetanus and erysipelas, may arise from causes totally irrespective of wounds or personal injuries. ('Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1859, p. 179.) The modern antiseptic treatment of wounds has greatly reduced the risk of purulent infection and blood-poisoning; and it is not improbable that the omission to employ antiseptic treatment in cases of wounding may hereafter be largely made use of for the purposes of defence. Questions relative to responsibility in death following operations would come more frequently before courts of law, were it not that the cases are stopped in coroners' courts by verdicts of accidental death. (Lond. ' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 19, p. 157.) It often unfortunately happens that on these occasions there is a great difference of opinion among medical witnesses respecting the connection of the disease with the death, and indeed the necessity for the operation itself. The evidence of opinion in favour of the prosecution is sometimes balanced by that urged in the defence, and, under these circumstances, the only course open to the court is to direct an acquittal. Differences of opinion upon these subjects among members of the profession tend to convey to the public the impression that there are no fixed principles upon which medical opinions are based, and, consequently, that it would be dangerous to act upon them. Thus it is that we are accustomed to hear of a medical prosecution and a medical defence, ^is if the whole duty of a medical jurist consisted in his making the best of a case on the side for which he happens to be engaged—adopting the legal rule for suppressing those points which are against him, and giving an undue prominence to others which may be in his favour. This is an unfortunate condition of things, for which at present there appears to be no adequate remedy. Medical Responsibility for OpevatioTis. Malapraxis.—This is a very wide subject, but it can here be only glanced at in a few of its leading features. It was held by Lord Ellenborough that, if a person acting in a medical capacity be guilty of misconduct, arising either from gross ignorance or criminal inattention, by which a patient di-es, he is guilty of manslaughter. Faults—such as omissions, or errors in judgment, to which all are hable—are not visited with this amount of criminality. The same rule applies to the hcensed as to the unlicensed practitioner; but it would appear, from the charg<e of Williams, J. (Winchester Spring Ass., 1847), that a degree of unskilfulness which might lead to the conviction of a licensed, would justify the acquittal of an unlicensed person. This was in the case of a midwife alleged to have caused the death of a woman on whom she had been called to attend. ' The charge,' said the judge, ' appeared to be that by want of skill or atteu-


[327/872 b22652516_0327.jp2]

MEDICAL RESPONSIBILITY FOR OPERATIONS. 315 tion to her duties, she had caused the death of the woman upon whom she was attending. In order to constitute this offence, it must be shown that the party was guilty of criminal misconduct, either arising from gross ignorance or want of skill, or gross inattention. With respect to the degree of want of skill, he must say that it was not to be expected that a midwife, who was called in to attend a person in the humble class of the deceased, a soldier's wife, should exhibit what a regular medical practitioner would call competent skill. It was enough if she applied that humble skill which, in ordinary cases, would lead to a safe delivery. She was not bound to have skill sufficient to meet peculiar and extraordinary exigencies, although in the case of a regular medical man such skill might be required. The class of this humble practitioner was absolutely necessary for the poorer classes, and, although on the one hand it was fit the law should protect a patient by punishing a person for gross want of skill, yet he thought there would be much to be lamented if it was applied with such severity ^is to render a party not possessing skill of this kind liable to punish- ment for manslaughter.' These observations would scarcely be strictly apphcable in the present day, when certified midwives are generally .available, at all events in our large towns. Charges of manslaughter have frequently been brought against medical practitioners in cases of midwifery. In some instances gross mismanagement has been proved; the womb, and even parts of the viscera, have been torn away, and in such cases convictions have very properly followed. It is well known, however, that much difference of opinion exists among the most eminent practitioners of midwifery respecting the treatment to be pursued in certain cases of difficulty, as where the afterbirth presents (placenta prsevia). There are eminent accoucheurs who advise in this case entirely opposite modes of practice, and who look upon that pursued by the other as of the most dangerous kind. When death is really not a result of the medical treatment, an , action for damages may be brought against the practitioner on a charge of malapraxis. It has been a question whether slight deviations from the ordinary mode of performing operations should involve a medical man in a charge of malapraxis. We are not aware that this question has been •hitherto raised in England. When on these occasions there is a division of opinion among men of equal experience respecting the necessity for an operation or the proper performance of it, a practitioner who is made defendant has a right to expect that a verdict will be returned in his favour; since it is not to be supposed that, in order to answer a charge of unskilfulness, a man's practice should receive the unanimous approval of the whole of his professional brethren, especially in cases in which there is an acknowledged difference of opinion respecting the treatment. All that appears to be expected is a reasonable accordance in treatment with received professional doctrines.


[328/872 b22652516_0328.jp2]

CICATRICES FROM WOUNDS. CHAPTER 31. CICATEIZATION OF WOUNDS.—EVIDENCE PROM CICATRICES.—CHANGES IN AN INCISED WOUND.—IS A CICATRIX ALWAYS A CONSEQUENCE OP A WOUND ?— ARE CICATRICES WHEN ONCE PORMED INDELIBLE ?—CHARACTERS OF CICA- TRICES.—THEIR AGE OR DATE.—CICATRICES FROM BLEEDING.—CUPPING, SETONS, AND ISSUES.—CICATRICES FROM BURNS.—CICATRICES FROM DISEASE DISTINGUISHED FROM THOSE OF WOUNDS. Cicatrization of Wounds.—The time at which a particular wound was inflicted may become a medico-legal question, both in relation to the living and the dead. The identity of a person, and the correctness of a statement made by an accused party, may be sometimes determined by an examination of a wound or its cicatrix. So, if a dead body be found with marks of violence upon it, and evidence adduced that the deceased was maltreated at some particular period before his death, it will be necessary for a practitioner to state whether, from^ the appearance of the injuries, they could or could not have been inflicted at or about the time assigned. A case was tried {Reg. v. Rai/non, Taunton Spring Ass., 1841) wherein evidence of this kind served to disprove a statement made by the accused. The prisoner was charged with maliciously cutting and wounding a woman. There was a cut upon his thumb, which he accounted for by saying it was from an accident that had occurred three weeks before. The medical witness declared, on examining it, that it could not have been done more than two or three days, which brought the period of its infliction to about the time of the murderous assault. This with other circumstances led to a conviction. An incised wound inflicted on the living body, not treated anti- septically, gradually heals by adhesion, when no circumstances interfere to prevent the union of the edges. For eight or ten hours the edges remain bloody; they then begin to swell, showing the access of inflammation. If the parts are not kept well in contact, a secretion of a serous liquid is poured out for about thirty-six or forty-eight hours. On the third day this secretion acquires a puru- lent character. On the fourth and fifth days, suppuration is fully established, and it lasts five, six, or eight days. A fibrous layer, which is at first soft and easily broken down, then makes its appear- ance between the edges of the wound: this causes them gradually to unite, and thus is produced what is termed a cicatrix. Cicatrization is complete about the twelfth or fifteenth day if the wound is simple, of httle depth and width, and affecting only parts endowed with great vitality. The length of time required for these changes to ensue will depend: 1. On the situation of the wound; wounds on the legs are longer in healing than those on the upper part of the body. If a wound is situated near a joint, so that the edges are continually separated by the motion of the parts, cicatrization is retarded. 2. On the extent; a deep or wide wound is long in undergoing cicatrization. Wounds


[329/872 b22652516_0329.jp2]

IS A CICATRIX ALWAYS A RESULT? 317 involving many and different structures are also longer in healing than those simply affecting the skin and muscles. 3. On the age and health of the wounded person; the process of cicatrization is slow in old persons, as well as in those who are diseased and infirm. In an incised wound the cicatrix is generally straight and regular; but it is semilunar if the cut is oblique. It has been said that the cicatrices of incised wounds are rectilinear, but this is not always the case. In general, they are more or less elliptical, being wider in the centre than at the two ends—this appears to be due principally to the elasticity of the skin and the convexity of the subjacent parts ; thus it is well known that in every wound on the living body the edges are more separated in the centre than at the ends, and this physical condition influences the process of cicatrization. When the wound is in a hollow surface, or over a part where the skin is not stretched, as in the armpit or groin, then the cicatrix may be rectilinear, or of equal width through- out. If there were any loss of substance in an incised wound, or if the wound were lacerated or contused, the cicatrix would be irregular, and the healing would proceed by granulation. The process might then occupy five, six, or eight weeks, according to circumstances. When healed, the cicatrix would be white, and if there had been a loss of substance it would be depressed and present a puckered appearance ; the surface of the skin would be uneven. (See Kriigelstein Henke's 'Zeitschr. der S.A.,' 1844, b. 2, s. 75.) Under antiseptic treatment suppuration of wounds is in a great measure avoided. Is a Cicatrix always a Consequence of a Wound f—Assuming that the term 'wound' implies a breach of continuity affecting the layers of the true skin (cutis), a cicatrix is always produced in the process of healing. Slight punctures or incisions with a lancet, and even leech-bites, affecting only the surface of the cutis, may leave no trace after a few weeks or months. In an even cut made by a very sharp instrument, especially if it is in the direction of the fibres of subjacent muscles, and the parts are kept in close contact, the cicatrix is even, linear, and sometimes so small as to be scarcely perceptible ; and, if the skin is white, it may be easily overlooked. Wounds of this kind are not, however, commonly the subject of medico-legal inquiry. If, on examining a part, where at some previous time a stab, cut, or burn involving the cutis is alleged to have been inflicted, we find no mark or cicatrix, it is fair to assume that the allegation is false, and that no wound has been inflicted, making due allowance for the fact that mere abrasions of the cuticle, or very slight punctures and incisions, often I heal without leaving any well-marked cicatrices, i A trial took place at the Old Bailey in 1834, in which a man was j wrongly charged with being a convict, and with having unlawfully I returned from transportation. The chief clerk of Bow Street pro- 1 duced a certificate, dated in 1817, of the conviction of a person, alleged to be the prisoner, under the name of Stuart. The governor of the gaol in which Stuart was confined believed the prisoner to be \ the person who was then in his custody. The guard of the hulks to which Stuart was consigned from the gaol, swore most positively that


[330/872 b22652516_0330.jp2]

WOUNDS. PERMANENCE OF CICATRICES. 3i8 the prisoner was the man. On the cross-examination of this witness, he admitted that the prisoner Stuart, who was in his custody in 1817, had a wen on his left hand; and so well rnarked was this that it formed a part of his description in the books of the convict-hulk. The prisoner said his name was Stipler: he denied that he was the person named Stuart, but from the lapse of years he was unable to bring forward any evidence. The recorder was proceeding to charge the jury, when the counsel for the defence requested to be permitted to put a question to an eminent surgeon, Carpue, who happened acci- dentally to be present in court. He deposed that it was impossible to remove such a wen as had been described without leaving a mark or cicatrix. Both hands of the prisoner were examined, but no wen, nor any mark of a wen having been removed, was found. Upon this the jury acquitted the prisoner. The cicatrices resulting from wounds after the performance of surgical operations are commonly well indicated by their regular form and their situation. They may present the characters of punctured or incised wounds, or a mere division of parts for the excision of tumours. As the healing process is assisted by art, the cicatrices are commonly marked by great regularity. The identity of a living person, or of a dead body, may be proved by the existence of a cica- trix which has been the result of a surgical operation. There can be no pretence for saying that such cicatrices, when they have involved the true skin, disappear. Whether the part is wrinkled or unusually fat, the cicatrix may be found if it has ever existed. A case in which this question respecting the permanency of cica- trices from wounds was raised, was referred to the author under the following circumstances. (Beg. v. Heed and Donelan, Chelmsford Spring Ass., 1842.) The medical evidence was to the effect that' there was a wound on the nose of the woman, apparently inflicted by some sharp instrument, and the bridge of the nose was broken down. The weapon had entered half an inch, and had caused profuse bleeding. The wound was so deep that if it had entered a little higher up in the eye, it might have caused death.' In the defence it was urged that no weapon had been used; and that, although the male prisoner had struck the wounded woman a blow, the female prisoner had taken no share in the assault. It does not appear that any medical evidence was called to show in what state the assailed person was at the time of the trial. It was assumed that a weapon must have been used, and the prisoners were convicted, the one of stabbing, and the other of aiding and abetting. About six months after the alleged stabbing, and some weeks after the prisoners had been convicted and sentenced to punishment, the face of the injured woman was examined by two surgeons (one of them a practitioner of twenty-eight years' standing), and they both deposed that there was no mark of a cica- trix from a stab, or fracture of the nose, or of any personal injury whatever. Other surgeons were requested to examine her face, but this she declined permitting; and, as there was no power to compel her, the medical facts of the case were referred to Quain, Guthrie,


[331/872 b22652516_0331.jp2]

CHARACTERS OF CICATRICES. I Key, and the author. The evidence of the surgeons at the trial was laid before them, with the statements of the two surgeons who sub- I sequently examined the woman. They all agreed that, if such a wound as that described in the medical evidence had been inflicted, there would have been a visible cicatrix and a ridge or prominence indicative of the situation where the bridge of the nose was stated to have been broken; and as no such marks could be perceived by two well-informed surgeons, they considered it improbable either that such a wound as that described could have been inflicted, or that a weapon could have been used in the assault. The question really to be decided was—Could all traces of such a wound as that above described, be ! efifaced in a period of six months or even during the life of a person? I Either the wound must have been misdescribed, or some marks of its past existence, in the form of a cicatrix, would unquestionably have been found. In Barnett v. Roberts (Court of Exch., Nov. 1867), an action was brought by a surgeon, for injury resulting from an assault by the defendant. It appeared from the evidence that the defendant struck the plaintiff two violent blows on the head with the handle of his umbrella. It was alleged that this had caused a fracture of the skull, and had produced a long and painful illness. Erichsen and Winslow gave evidence for the plaintiff to the effect that in their 1 judgment the skull was fractured, the brain organically injured, and the plaintiffs recovery rendered practically hopeless. On the other hand, for the defence. Partridge and Wood, with other witnesses, deposed that the skull was not fractured, and that the depression supposed to indicate the fracture was congenital and not the result of ' a blow or accident. A skull with a natural depression in it was pro- duced and shown to the jury. The plaintiff's head was examined in court by Partridge. He could feel no cicatrix in the alleged seat of j injury, but there was a thickening over the depression. On this i evidence the jury could not agree. There would be no difficulty in such a case if a careful examination was made soon after the assault; but when surgical opinions are taken some weeks or months after- wards, the witnesses may disagree. Even if there had been a cicatrix on this occasion, this would not have proved that the skull had been , fractured. The injury to the brain might well have been a result of I the violence, although there had been no fracture. Characters of Cicatrices. Their Age or Date.—In an early stage a cicatrix is softer and redder than the surrounding skin, but after some months or years it becomes white, hard, smooth, and shining. The : fibrous substance of which it is formed receives less blood than the I uninjured skin ; hence, on compressing the skin around an old cicatrix, its situation and form are well marked by reason of the blood not readily entering into it on removal of the pressure. As the age of a cicatrix increases, it becomes smaller, thicker, whiter, more shining, and less sensitive. It is fibrous in structure, dense, without sebaceous I follicles, adipose cells, or hairs, and it contains but few absorbents and exhalants. The time required for these changes to take place cannot be defined. In one person they may be observed in a few months, and


[332/872 b22652516_0332.jp2]

WOUNDS. CHARACTERS OF CICATRICES. 320 in another only after some years. The tissue of which an old cicatrix is formed is different from that of the skin; it is harder, contains less blood, and is destitute of any coloured pigment, so that its whiteness, which is remarkable on the cicatrized skin of a negro, is retained through life. If any cicatrices were easily obliterated, it would be those which are even and regular—the results of incised wounds by sharp instruments; but cicatrices of this kind have certainly retained their characters unchanged in one instance for twenty, and in another for twenty-five years. According to the observations of Dupuytren and Delpech, the substance of a cicatrix is not converted into true skin —it never acquires a rete mucosum, i.e. the membrane which gives colour to the skin. Although this is generally true of incised and punctured wounds, yet contused and lacerated wounds on the legs of persons advanced in life frequently present a brown discoloration. In the cicatrices of lacerated and contused wounds, the form of the weapon with which the wound was inflicted is sometimes indicated. It is not, however, easy to distinguish the cicatrix of a stab of old date from that produced by a pistol-bullet fired from a distance. In both cases the edges may be rounded and irregular, and the cicatrix puckered, unless the stab has been produced by a broad- bladed weapon. If no mark of cutting can be perceived within a few months of the period at which a severe wound is alleged to have been inflicted, it is reasonable to infer that there has been some mis- take, or that the circumstances have been exaggerated. Cicatrices increase in size during the process of growth. Adams found, in the case of an infant who had been operated on, a cicatrix doubled in length and greatly increaeed in width after eighteen years. Vacci- nation scars in the adult are frequently seen from one-half to three- quarters of an inch in diameter, the increased size from the original puncture arising from the growth of the cicatrix. Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1873, ii. p. 774.) Paget has made a similar observation. The growth takes place pari passu with the body. ('Lect. on Path.,' vol. i. p. 49.) It is important to observe that all cicatrices are of smaller size than the original wound, for there is a contraction of the skin during the process of heahng. This is especially noticed with regard to the cica- trix of a stab, which is frequently of a triangular form. A recent stab, owing to the elasticity of the skin, is smaller than the weapon ; and the resulting cicatrix is always smaller than the wound. Hence it is difficult to judge of the size of the stabbing instrument from an examination of an old cicatrix. Cicatrices arising from a loss of sub- stance in the cutis, or true skin, are usually indicated by a depression. In gunshot-wounds, if the projectile has been fired from a distance, the cicatrix is of smaller dimensions than the ball. It represents a disc depressed in the centre, and attached to the parts beneath, while the skin is in a state of tension from the centre to the circumference. The amount of depression is great in proportion to the quantity of cellular membrane beneath. If the bullet has been fired near to the body, the cicatrix is large, deep, and very irregular. In this case there may be


[333/872 b22652516_0333.jp2]

321 THEIR DATE. CICATRICES FROM DISEASE. the blueish mark of tattooing from the gunpowder carried into the skin. If the projectile has made two apertures, the aperture of exit is known by the greater size and irregularity of the cicatrix. (See ' Edin. Month. Jour.; 1854, vol. 10, p. 370.) There are no appearances in a cicatrix which will allow ms to fix the date at which the wound leading to its production was inflicted, and it is often most difficult to say how or by what means it was inflicted. If the person is hving, he may give a description of the injury and the date of its production, which may be consistent or inconsistent with the appearances presented. As Caspar justly remarks, it requires more than two, three, or four weeks to produce the hard white shining appearance of an old cicatrix; but when it has once acquired these characters, there are no medical data for enabling us to determine whether the injury was inflicted two, three, or even ten years before. A proper attention to the number, situation, and appearances presented by cicatrices on the living or dead body, will, however, sometimes enable a medical witness to establish or disprove the identity of persons. Cicatrices from Wounds or Disease. Imputed Cicatrices.—As there are imputed wounds, so there may be imputed cicatrices. It is rare to hear of frauds of this description : the wound must be made in antici- pation at a long date in order to give the appearance of an old cicatrix; the part wounded must be selected in order to carry out the fraud; and the person producing the wound may carry the incision or punc- ture too deeply or too superficially, and thus lead to detection. It is more likely that an impostor may seek to gain his object either by attributing the cicatrices of wounds accidentally received to other causes, or by ascribing cicatrices which have resulted from disease to some particular cause occurring in early life. Thus an impostor with old scars upon his person may make use of them as proofs of identity. Such scars may really exist; they may be clearly proved to be of old date, and they may be assigned to causes which cannot be dis- proved except by a close medical examination. The scars or cicatrices may have arisen from scrofulous ulcers or abscesses, in which case it would not be difficult to distinguish them from the cicatrices of wounds. In the case of Smyth v. Smyth (Gloucester Sum. Ass., 1853), the plain- tiff claimed to be the rightful heir to certain estates occupied by the defendant. He based his claim upon some deeds (alleged by the defendant to have been forged), in which it was stated that the lost heir to these estates would be known by certain marks on his right hand and wrist, suggested to have been received at the time of his birth, in 1797, by reason of his having been brought into the world with instruments. It was one of the curious features of this extra- ordinary case of imposture that no medical opinion was taken or required by the claimant, on the probable nature and origin of these marks. When requested at the trial to show his hand to the jury, the mark had the appearance of a puckered cicatrix from a scrofulous ulcer near the wrist. Similar marks from scrofulous sores were seen upon his neck. His statements regarding himself, and the circum-


[334/872 b22652516_0334.jp2]

322 CICATRICES FROM DISEASE. stances on which he based his claim, were so improbable and con- tradictory that the case speedily broke down. A question of this kind may occasionally present some difficulty, but a close examina- tion of the cicatrix, with a consideration of the statement of the person on its mode of production, will enable a practitioner to arrive at a satis- factory conclusion respecting its origin. Scrofulous ulcers are generally observed to leave irregular and deeply furrowed cicatrices, with smooth depressions, surrounded by hard and uneven margins. According to Schneider, the scorbutic cicatrix is at first dark, blueish-red in colour, soft to the touch, somewhat raised and rather painful; in the course of time it becomes flatter, of a reddish-brown colour, very thin and easily injured. Syphilitic cicatrices are characterized iDy great loss of sub- stance ; they approximate the margins of the deep ulcers before their granulations have had time to reach the surface. Glandular cicatrices are irregularly tumefied, generally deep, hardened, and of a reddish- brown colour. These varieties cannot easily be mistaken for the cicatrices of wounds; but it is not so easy to distinguish them from each other. Malle remarks that the form and shape of the cicatrix depend less on the cause producing it than on its anatomical position. The elasticity of the skin, the looseness or density of the cellular tissue beneath, the depression or convexity of the surface, and the tension of the muscles, are circumstances which will modify the form of the ulcer and the cicatrix proceeding from it. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1840, t. 1, 430.) An expert can seldom do more than distinguish the cicatrices of ulcers arising from morbid causes from those which hav€ resulted from violence. Cicatrices in the inguinal regions raise a presumption that they are of syphilitic origin, but it is impossible to say that they may not have been derived from simple abscesses. The cicatrices of scrofulous ulcers have some resemblance to those produced by firearms, but it may be pre- sumed that they are of a scrofulous origin when they are situated in the region of the neck, below the jaw, or in the course of the parotid gland, especially when there is any enlargement of the neighbouring glands. A puckered and folded state of the skin around the cicatrix would confirm this opinion. Is a cicatrix, when once formed, ever removed or so altered by time as to be no longer recognizable ?—This is a question which sometimes pre- sents itself to a medical jurist both in civil and criminal proceedings. When a cicatrix has been produced by the healing of a wound involv- ing a loss of substance in the cutis or true skin, it is permanent. In wounds involving the whole substance of the skin, the cicatrix which is once formed does not disappear, although it may undergo some changes and become less distinct in after-life. Wounds which heal by suppura- tion and granulation generally leave behind them cicatrices which remain for life. The marks arising from the pustules of vaccination, small-pox, herpes zoster (shiugles), and those produced by setons and issues, leave cicatrices easily recognizable at any period. Cicatrices of wounds made after the completion of growth do not increase in size: they retain the same proportions through life. When the substance of the skin has been penetrated, it retracts, owing to the yellow elastic


[335/872 b22652516_0335.jp2]

PERMANENCE OF CICATRICES. fibrous tissue which it contains, and the gap thus made is filled up with white fibrous or cicatricial tissue, which forms a marked contrast with the surrounding skin. This may be seen in the cicatrices of the apertures made by bleeding, or in the scars left by herpes zoster. This cicatrix tissue, or connective tissue, as it is called, when once formed, is permanent. It never wears out or wastes. A man may allege, in proof of his identity, that at a former period of his life he was bled in the arm, foot, or temporal artery, that he had undergone cupping, or that he had had a seton or issue in his arm. The simple questions for a medical witness will then be— Are the marks left by these operations present ? Are they visible in the situations in which such operations are usually performed? Do they present such cicatrices as would be likely to result from the alleged operations ? If not visible at the time of examination, is it or is it not probable that they may have spontaneously disappeared by lapse of time? These simple questions may carry with them momentous issues, either in a civil or criminal case. With regard to cupping, when the operation is properly performed, the numerous small and slightly elliptical cicatrices are well indicated by their whiteness and symmetrical position. The cicatrix left by the use of the lancet in bleeding from a vein in the arm or foot is similar to that of cupping—white, linear, slightly elliptical, with its l-ength in the direction of the vessel, and not across it. About sixty years ago, bleeding from the arm was a frequent operation, the same person requiring to be bled at spring and fall. The cicatrices that resulted were always perceptible; in some instances, when the person had been bled several times in or near the same part of the vein, a hard or knotted white cicatrix was produced, rising above the level of the skin. There is no reason to believe that such a mark, involving as it does the whole cutis, ever disappears. Beck quotes the case of a child (Noiseu), which had been bled in the right arm when sixteen months old. When nearly four years old the child was lost, and two years subsequently, the godmother, seeing two boys pass, was struck by the voice of one of them; she called him to her, and was convinced that it was her lost godson. The identity was also considered to be proved by the dis- covery of a cicatrix from bleeding in the right arm, and a cicatrix from an abscess in the left knee, both of which were present in the lost child, and also in the one that was found. The latter, however, had upon his body marks of the small-pox, while no marks of this kind were on the child when lost. The child was claimed by a widow (Lahrie), and many witnesses deposed that it was really her son. The court decided in her favour, chiefly on the ground that the lost child was not marked with the small-pox (Beck's 'Med. Jur.,' 2nd ed., p. 222). It was admitted that the found child had, on the arm and knee, cicatrices similar to those which were known to exist in the one that was missing, and had the medical witnesses agreed about the causes of them, it is probable that the decision would have been different. The cicatrix on the knee was ascribed to the use of caustics by some of the surgeons, and to a slight abrasion by others. The widow admitted that her child had


[336/872 b22652516_0336.jp2]

324 WOUNDS. MEDICAL EVIDENCE. SCARS. never been bled in the arm, while the missing child had certainly under- gone this operation; but on the question as to the presence of a cicatrix from bleeding, there was a conflict of medical opinion. Three surgeons examined the cicatrix, and declared that it had been made with a sharp instrument. Others deposed that it was not a cicatrix from bleeding, but from the opening of an abscess. As the child had been missing two years, it might have had the small-pox in the mean time. If a proper examination of the two cicatrices had been made by medical assessors appointed by the Court, this conflict of medical opinion would not have arisen, and the decision might have been different. According to Caspar, the cicatrix left by venesection may sometimes disappear, although he adduces no fact in proof (' Gerichtl. Med.,' vol. i. p. 113); and ordinary surgical experience is against it. Devergie correctly states that every wound which involves the thickness of the skin (cutis) leaves a cicatrix which is indelible. (' Med. Leg.,' vol. ii. p. 217.) According to him, it may become less distinct by time, but it never entirely disappears. In all contested cases of this kind, where there is ample room for a difference of opinion, it would be more satis- factory to take the evidence of skilled medical assessors appointed by the court, than to receive that of medical men specially selected by solicitors to uphold their different views of the case. This would be giving its true value to medical testimony, in aiding, by a proper inter- pretation of physical signs, to clear away the doubts which necessarily arise by trusting to a supposed remembrance of the features, voice, and gesture, after the lapse of many years. At the celebrated Tichborne trial {Beg. v. Castro, Q. B., 1873), the possibility of the disappearance of scars was made a matter of great importance as bearing upon identity. Roger Tichborne, the missing baronet, whilst on the ship Pauline, met with an accident by which a fish-hook passed clean through one eyelid, and had to be pulled through and out; and it was truly alleged that such a wound would leave a scar, and that this would probably be indelible. He had also been bled, an operation which usually leaves indelible scars. It was also certain that, when a lad, Roger had either an issue or a seton on his left arm. According to the prosecution, it was an issue, and was kept open by a pea. According to the defence, it was a seton. On the defendant's arm there was no mark either of an issue or of a seton. Moreover, there was no scar on the eyelid such as would have been produced by the fish-hook. Further, Roger had his temporal vein opened when a young man; and there was no scar on the defendant's temples. Although it must be admitted that a venesection-mark may disappear in the course of time, it is in the highest degree improbable that several cicatrices such as have been described would all disappear. The defendant was convicted of the attempted imposture; or rather of perjury in swearing at the first (civil) trial that he was the veritable Sir Roger Tichborne (see p. 334, post). In the case of venesection- marks, a medical jurist may be required to give an opinion on the cause and date of their production; and in the case of the alleged disappearance of scars, he may be required to say whether—assuming


[337/872 b22652516_0337.jp2]

CICATRICES FROM SETONS, ISSUES, AND PUSTULES. 325 them to have once existed—they could have disappeared, either from natural causes, or from chemical or other means employed to obliterate them. In some countries it is the custom to brand convicts, and the cicatrix from the brand-mark—a letter burnt into the skin—is regarded as the strongest proof of identity. By a remarkable coincidence, two persons may have cicatrices on or about the same part of the body, produced by cuts, punctures, or abscesses in early Hfe; and serious mistakes may be made under these circumstances. A case is reported to have occurred in France, in 1794, in which a man named Lesurgues was tried, convicted, and executed for robbery and murder. There were some doubts at the time as to his identity; and strong exertions were made to save his life. Soon after his execution, the real murderer was discovered, between whom and Lesurgues, who had had no hand or part in the crime, there existed a wonderful resemblance in stature, complexion, and features. But the most extraordinary part of the case was that Lesurgues, like the real criminal, had a cicatrix or scar on the forehead, and another on the hand; and there is no doubt that these points of resemblance, which upon a proper scientific examination might have been proved to be really different, became the turning-point of the case, and led to the conviction of an innocent person. The parts selected for setuns or issues are generally about the shoulder, the nape of the neck, or the upper arm. The situation of the cicatrices may thus serve to throw some light on their origin. The cicatrix left by an issue cannot be mistaken for the cicatrix caused by a seton. In the first place, it is single, depressed below the level of the skin, and rounded in its margin; and, as in all cases in which the cutis is destroyed, it remains as an indelible mark. It is impossible by any process to restore to the skin its uniformity and evenness of surface. Malle has pointed out that the double cicatrix which is left by the application of a seton may present an appearance which might be mis- taken for the entrance and exit-apertures of a bullet, since in both cases a band of hardened lymph may be felt between the two cicatrices. When a hard band of connection cannot be felt between them, the marks cannot be owing either to a bullet or a seton, but they may be due to a bite, or to separate wounds produced in the skin at or about the same time. With respect to blisters, they produce only a superficial and tempo- rary reddening of the cutis. They do not commonly leave a scar, imless their irritant action has extended to the substance of the cutis, and has led to ulceration and suppuration; the ulcerated being sepa- rated from the non-ulcerated portions of the skin, and indicated, according to Dupuytren, by an indelible brown mark. The cicatrices left as a result of the application of the true vaccine' lymph have a pecuhar irregular honeycombed appearance, with white streaks slightly depressed below the level of the surrounding skin. The spurious vaccine-mark is of a reddish colour, not depressed, and not presenting the honeycombed appearance and white streaks of the cicatrix of the true pustule.


[338/872 b22652516_0338.jp2]

326 CICATRICES FROM BURNS. The scars produced hy small-pox are in the form of deep depressions, showing a complete destruction of the cutis. Independently of the cicatrices from local injury, these cases of con- tested identity may present other physical signs, such as moles, ncevi (mother's marks), and other congenital defects to which ordinary wit- nesses may be able to testify. There can be no fallacy of memory touching the form, size, and position of such marks, and they differ from cicatrices in this—they cannot be artificially imitated. They may, it is true, be removed, but only by actual or the electric cautery, or by caustic appHcations. If thus removed, a cicatrix is left in the skin which is indelible. A case is reported by Beck, in which a girl, Salome Muller, had been sold as a slave, but her identity as the child of German parents was proved after many years by two marks resembling moles about the size of ccfiee-grains, on the inside of the thighs. They were proved to have existed in the child, and they were proved to exist in the same parts of the body of the girl eighteen years afterwards. After much litigation, she was, upon this evidence, pronounced to be a free woman. (' Med. Jur.,' vol. i. p. 662.) Cicatrices from Barns.—This subject has been fully investigated by Malle. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1840,1.1, 422.) A superficial burn, in healing, produces a broad irregular cicatrix, varying with the form of the burn- ing body. If the burn has extended to some depth below the cutis, the cicatrix is deep, and has a rounded margin; but in the depression, it is irregular and contracted in proportion to its depth. Solid caustics produce cicatrices with regular edge&, as the corrosive substance easily penetrates uniformly through the deep layers of the skin. Caustic liquids produce only superficial marks unless they have been allowed to penetrate deeply, when, by the destruction of parts, they may give rise to deep and irregular cicatrices. When the cutis is destroyed, an indelible cicatrix remains, whether it is the result of a bum from a heated solid, or from the chemical action of a highly corrosive liquid. In a case in which the strongest nitric acid was applied to the skin for the removal of a mole, the cicatrix produced was visible after twenty- five years. In the Whitechapel murder case {Beg. v. Wainwright, C. C. C, Nov. 1875), the body of the deceased woman, Harriet Lane, was identified, spite of decomposition, and a year after death, by the pre- sence of an old scar on the leg, the result of a burn. The subject of cicatrices as they are found io the neck, whether arising from wounds, scrofulous disease, or burns, has been fully examined by Giiterbock, in an elaborate paper. ('Vierteljahrsschr. fur Gerichtl. Med.,' 1873, 2, p. 84.)


[339/872 b22652516_0339.jp2]

TATTOO-MARKS. MODE AND DATE OF PRODUCTION. 327 CHAPTER 32. MEDICAL EVIDENCE OF IDENTITY FEOM COLOURED CICATRICES OR TATTOO- MARKS.—MODE AND DATE OP PRODUCTION.—DURABILITY OP THESE MARKS.—THEIR ALLEGED SPONTANEOUS DISAPPEARANCE,—CASES OP IDEN- TITY FROM TATTOOING.—SIMULATED MARKS. ^TATTOO-MARKS ON THE DEAD.—MEDICAL RESPONSIBILITY. The subject of tattooing has been noticed by medical jurists. Several trials have occurred of late years in France and Germany which show the great importance of this subject in cases of contested personal iden- tity. The Tkliborne case (see pp. 324, 334), which occupied our law-courts for nearly two years, involved some issues of importance in relation to identity from cicatrices and the marks of tattooing. The presence of tattooed or coloured marks on the skin of a person, verified by a competent observer, may become the strongest possible proof of identity, and their proved absence, if not accounted for or explained, may furnish the most convincing evidence of non-identity. An escaped convict may allege that he never was tattooed. There may be no coloured marks on his skin, but a medical expert may be able to demonstrate that there have been such marks, and that tmces of them still exist. A man who is found to be tattooed may, in order to escape punishment, pass himself off as another person, also tattooed. In this case medical evidence must be derived from a comparison of the colour, form, and situation of the marks in the two. A tattooed man may claim an estate, and adduce the tattoo-marks as a proof of his identity. It would be difficult for an impostor setting up a false claim tO' simulate marks of this kind. The operation would require time and an accurate imitation of the colour and design, as well as of the part of the body I selected. Members of the family would be able to say whether they j were or were not such marks as those which had existed on their miss- 1 ing relative. There may be satisfactory proof that the missing person I was tattooed, while an impostor may allege that he had not been 1 tattooed. The fact, however, may be that at some former period of I his life a man had undergone this operation, and, to prevent a dis- I covery of his identity, he had removed the marks by cautery or other means. As the presence of tattoo-marks, and their correspondence in situation, colour, and design with those on a missing person, would furnish the strongest possible evidence of identity, so their absence in I a given case, unless clearly explained, must be considered as the best i I proof of non-identity. II Coloured Cicatrices. Mode and Bate of Production.—These marks ; arise from small punctured wounds made into the true skin with three 1 1 or four sharp needles closely bound together. The needles are dipped in colouring matter at each time that the punctures are made. When I the substance of the cutis is penetrated, as it ought to be in order to I leave a permanent mark, there is, in a few hours, much swelhng of the skin, with general inflammation. The colours commonly employed in


[340/872 b22652516_0340.jp2]

328 DURABILITY OF THE MARKS. Mttooing are charcoal (gunpowder), China-ink, vermilion, and indigo. Other vegetable colouring matters of a fugitive kind are sometimes used. China-ink and charcoal, although black, produce designs on a white skin which have a blueish tint. The colouring matter thus de- posited mechanically in these minute punctured wounds, after the first attack of inflammation has passed off", remains permanently encysted in the substance of the cutis or true skin and in the cellular membrane below it. It has been there found after death. According to Berchon, the local symptoms of irritation and inflammation last about a fort- night. At the end of the first month the lines of colour appear wider than they will be ultimately. About the sixth week, the cuticle begins to scale off; and at the end of about two months, or a somew^hat longer period, the skin acquires its normal condition. The designs in vermilion are at this early time much more intense than those in China-ink. When the local symptoms have subsided, the tattoo-marks are fixed, and it is impossible to assign a date to them. Durability of the Marks. Alleged Spontaneous Disappearance.—In imperfect cases of tattooing, when soluble and fugitive colours are used and the surface of the cutis only is penetrated, the marks may dis- appear or be removed by artificial means. Not so when the colouring matter is carried completely into the substance of the cutis or true skin. It there forms an intimate combination with the fibrous structure of the skin, and remains permanently fixed. Eayer has shown by the maceration of tattooed skin that the cuticle may be removed, and it is colourless as in ordinary skin. This, therefore, proves that the colour- ing matter is firmly imbedded in the cutis and cellular tissue below it. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1855, t. 1, p. 194.) A maceration of the skin in water for two months did not affect the colour of the tattoo-marks, and Tardieu found that no solvent could remove the colouring matter with- out at the same time destroying the texture of the skin. Tattoo-marks are not removed, because the colouring matter is insoluble and cannot permeate the roots of the vessels. Silver marks are equally indelible, when deposited from taking nitrate of silver internally. Finely divided substances, such as mercury, may penetrate; also finely divided charcoal, taken into the intestines, has been found in the mesenteric veins. In 1874, there was a case in Guy's Hospital that well illustrated the durability of these marks. The man, set. 50, had been a sailor, and while in the China seas from 1842 to 1847 he was tattooed at different times. There were numerous designs on both arms and the front of the chest, some of them artistically representing flowers and leaves, a flower-pot, and human figures. There were only two colours, blue-black and red, the former done with China-ink, the latter with vermilion. The operation had been performed by an English sailor. Three needles were used—these, dipped into the colour, were introduced deeply into the skin sideways, or in a valvular form, and the ink mixed with water was then well rubbed over. The vermilion was rubbed in, as a powder. Some blood flowed, and after a few days the parts cicatrized, the scabs came away, and the man suffered no in- convenience. The marks were deeply imbedded in the cutis; some


[341/872 b22652516_0341.jp2]

ALLEGED DISAPPEARANCE OF TATTOO-MARKS. 329 were deeper in tint and blacker than others, this result depending on the strength of the China-ink used. The colours had undergone no change up to 1874, although one of them at the back of the hand, representing a flower-vase with flowers, had been exposed to light and to frequent contact with water and other liquids, including naphtha, but it had made no diflerenee in its appearance. The vermihon had also retained its colour. It is a remarkable coincidence that on his left arm were the capital letters 'EOT,' but these did not correspond to the initials of the name of the patient The marks were unchanged after, at the lowest estimate, twenty-six years. In most anatomical museums, preparations of tattooed skin may be seen. In Guy's Hospital Museum there are many. The designs have been produced with gunpowder, and some small portions with vermilion. In one of them, which has been preserved in spirit for fifty years, the marks on the skin of the leg represent an animal like a goat; they are of a blueish-black colour. In the part from which the cuticle has been removed the colour appears much more intense. There is nothing to indicate that this preparation has undergone the slightest change of colour during its long maceration in spirit. This and the other pre- parations also show that no colour is removed by removing the cuticle; on the contrary, the colour becomes brighter and more intense by con- trast with the white surface of the cutis. Another preparation of the skin of the arm represents in blue-black (carbon) and red (vermilion) the Crucifixion, with the date—Nantes, 1808. In this also the cuticle has been removed in part, with the effect of bringing out the colours more strongly. Eighty-three years have passed since these marks were produced, but neither while hving nor in undergoing maceration in water and spirits after death, is there any appearance of change in the depth of colour or in the outlines of the design. In a third, the skin was taken from the arm of a saflor, who died in Guy's Hospital in 1857. The designs represent the arms of England, Adam and Eve, the tree of life, and the serpent. It has been noticed with regard to this preparation that the red or vermilion colour has become less marked during the years that it has been in the museum. Another preparation of the skin from over the scapula has simply a large letter ' D,' the brand of a deserter. This was removed from a dead body in 1860. A fifth, of the date of about twenty-two years, represents, in a very perfect manner, a ship in full sail, with the figure of a woman. This portion of skin was taken from the body of a sailor. These facts show how durable the carbonaceous colours are when the substance has once penetrated the cutis. No amount of maceration appears in any way to affect or alter them. A surveyor accidentally punctured the skin of the back of his hands with a sharp steel pen charged with China-ink. A blueish-black spot was formed after the heahng of the wound; this was quite visible and unchanged after six years, and it would no doubt continue for life. A near relative of the author was tattooed with China-ink on the inside of the arm. The designs, which were of a blueish colour, remained un- changed up to his death, i.e. for twenty-eight years. It has been


[342/872 b22652516_0342.jp2]

330 REMOVAL OF TATTOO-MARKS BY ART. rather hastily assumed that in a certain percentage of cases, tattoo- marks spontaneously disappear in the course of time. Thus Hutin examined 506 cases of tattooing. Relying upon the statements made by soldiers, sailors, convicts, and others, his conclusion was that in 47 the marks were completely obliterated after a period of from twenty- eight to sixty years; in 117 the marks were partially obliterated after a period of from ten to sixty-four years; but in 342 the marks were quite distinct after a space of from four to sixty-five years. With the exception of two cases of tattooing in vermilion which disappeared after thirty years, Tardieu found that the disappearance of tattoo-marks did not take place until after thirty to forty years, and of the only two tattooings with China-ink which were obliterated, one disappeared after forty-five and the other only after sixty years. These and similar facts show that in a few cases these marks may fade or become less visible, but this change requires a period of ten years at the least. The fading of the marks most probably arises, not from a removal of the colouring matter by the absorbents, but from the fact that in some cases the tattooing has been superficially per- formed on a thin skin. If the absorbents can remove from the tattoo- marks such insoluble colours as carbon and vermilion, it would scarcely require a period of from ten to twentj^-eight years for their removal, and on this theory it would be impossible to explain why tattoo-marks remain permanent in any case. The subject has been considered by Horteloup. (' Ann. d^Hyg.,' 1870, t. 2, p. 453, and 1872, t. 1, p. 423.) It is said that the vermilion has been seen in substance in the neigh- bouring absorbent glands, but it does not appear that mercury has ever been detected in these glands (Casper), the crucial test of its presence. The nature of the colouring material appears to have some influence on the durability of the tattoo-marks. Thus Hutin found that out of 78 persons who had been tattooed with vermilion alone, the tattoo- marks had disappeared in eleven, and that out of 104 tattooed with black pigment, such as carbon, China-ink, etc., not one had become obliterated. This permanency of the black pigment has also been noticed by other observers. The general conclusion from these observations is that tattoo-marks once properly made in the cutis are practically indelible, but that when the operation is imperfectly performed, the marks may, in the course of many years, become lighter and disappear. This is observed more commonly with red colouring matter than with the black or carbo- naceous colours. As accurate information can seldom be obtained respecting the tattooing in early life, it may be inferred in a contested case in which the marks are proved to have disappeared, that the tattooing was imperfectly performed. This point, however, admits of refutation when it can be proved that the marks are still visible on the arm of another, tattooed at the same time, by the same person, and with similar materials. Removal of Tattoo-marks hy Art.—Many absurd statements have been made by convicts respecting the removal of tattoo-marks from their skin. The only methods by which such marks admit of removal


[343/872 b22652516_0343.jp2]

REMOVAL OF TATTOO-MARKS. are by excision of the cutis, or the apphcation of the actual cautery or escharotics to destroy the skin. In such cases cicatrices remain, which, under a proper examination, may lead to detection. A case occurred to Tardieu in which the fact of obliteration was the main question for solution. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1855, t. 1, p. 201.) A man named Auhert was charged with having committed a robbery in 1843. His defence was that he was at that date confined in a certain prison under the assumed name of Solignon. On searching the prison-register it was found that a man named Solignon was there confined at the date assigned, and the description of the prisoner showed that he was tattooed on both arms—on the left there were two hearts, a dog, and other emblems; on the right a man, a woman, a dog, and two hearts. On examining the prisoner Aubert, no marks of tattooing were seen upon his arms, although he affirmed that he had been tattooed by a friend in 1840, and again in 1846, with a blue vegetable ink, but that he had some months previously removed the marks by a chemical process. He also described the marks: those on the right arm repre- senting the bust of a woman and the letters ' J S,' and on the left a tomb, with foliage, etc. In 1846, a hunting scene had been added, but this was the faintest of all. By close examination of the skin with a lens in a strong light, Tardieu was^ able to detect faint white marks like cicatrices representing the outline of a tomb, with two hearts; and the marks indicative of two letters were also detected on the skin of the other arm by the same means. By these observations, the non- identity of the accused Aubert with the former prisoner Solignon was clearly proved. Both were tattooed, but the tattoo-designs were quite different, and under less skilful hands than those of Tardieu, Aubert might have escaped the punishment which he merited. The prisoner Aubert communicated to Tardieu the plan which he had adopted for removing the tattoo-marks. He first applied an ointment of strong acetic acid, then a weak solution of potash, and afterwards hydrochloric acid. The skin which had been removed by these caustics was gradually reproduced; but although the colouring material was removed, hnear cicatrices were left in the skin in every part to which the tattooing-needles had been applied, Tardieu sub- sequently tried this process on some tattoo-marks, and found that the colouring matter might be thus removed, but that traces indicative of the original designs were still left in the skin. Simple friction of the skin will sometimes suffice to bring out obliterated tattoo-marks. An escaped convict was on trial before a French court, and the ques- tion turned upon his identity with a prisoner known to have been tattooed. There was no appearance of coloured marks upon his arm, and the question submitted to Leroy was whether the man had ever been tattooed. Leroy applied strong friction to the skin of the arm. This had the effect of bringing out cicatrices as white lines with a slight blueish tint. By this means the word ' Sophie' was plainly legible in white marks on the reddened skin. This fixed the identity of the convict. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1870, t. 2, p. 460.) As perfect tattooing cannot take place without deeply wounding the


[344/872 b22652516_0344.jp2]

TATTOO MARKS ON THE DEAD. 332 cutis and causing a cicatrix, we must not trust to the absence of colour only when an opinion is required whether the person has or has not been tattooed. These observations equally apply to the destruction of the marks by fire. Horteloup examined the arm of a man, set. 42, who at the age of 18 had been tattooed with China-ink. At the age of 30 a bar of iron, at a white heat, accidentally dropped on the tattooed portion of his arm. Twelve years after this accident Horteloup found a white cicatrix on the arm which had obliterated part of the design (a ship). When the obliterated portion was minutely examined with a lens, faint white lines were seen which tilled up and completed the figure of a ship. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1870, t. 2, p. 459.) Bois de Loury met with an instance which proves that it is very difficult to eradicate the tattoo-marks without leaving distinct cicatrices of them. In this case a man had a number of initials of names spread over the skin of his chest and arms, and in many parts he had obliterated the letters by a red-hot iron applied to the skin,—but in every instance there was a well-defined cicatrix, and it was still possible to make out traces of the letters. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1872, t. 1, p. 423.) Tattoo-marks on the Dead.—When we are required to examine a dead body for marks of tattooing, great caution is required if no coloured marks are apparent on the skin. Putrefaction, unless very far advanced, does not interfere with their appearance. Tardieu states that, in examining the partially decomposed body of a man who had been a carpenter, the tattoo-marks on his arm clearly represented the instru- ments of his trade. When the question is whether the marks have been on the arm and subsequently removed, there will be some difficulty. An examination of the skin with a lens in a strong light may show the presence of lines corresponding to cicatrices,; but the evidence derivable from friction of the skin is here lost. Horteloup recommends the examination of the neighbouring absorbent glands for the colouring matter; but if the marks are of many years' standing, colouring matter is not likely to be found in them. In this respect a case which occurred to Casper is eminently instructive. In 1849, the body of a man, de- capitated, was found in the neighbourhood of Berlin. It was supposed to be that of one Gottlieb Ebermann, who was missing. It was stated that the body of Ebermann could be identified by marks of cupping on the wrists, an operation performed on him eight or nine years before his death, and also by tattoo-marks of a heart and the letters ' G E' on the left arm. On an examination of the body no marks of any kind could be perceived, and Ebermann's wife, who had been married to him two years, and his three sisters, affirmed that they had never seen any tattoo-marks on him. The body was exhumed after five months, but owing to putrefaction no further evidence could be obtained from it. A man named Schall had been in the mean time charged with the murder, and the circumstantial evidence was so strong against him that nothing more was required than to prove that the body found was that of Ebermann. Of two medical experts who were called to give evidence, one deposed that the marks of cupping could always be distinguished, and those of tattooing were indelible; the other stated that the marks


[345/872 b22652516_0345.jp2]

333 IDENTITY FROM TATTOO-MARKS. of cupping might spontaneously disappear, but with regard to the tattooing he could give no opinion. As this medical evidence failed to establish the identity of the body, the opinion of Casper was required by the court. In his report, taken from the observations made in a large asylum for aged and invalid soldiers, a class among whom tattoo- marks are common, he stated that out of 36 examples, in three the tattooing had become faint with time ; in two the marks were partially effaced; in four they were completely obliterated; hence he came to the conclusion that the marks of tattooing may disappear. A witness came forward and declared, during the investigation, that at fifteen he had tattooed himself on the arm with vermilion, and that the marks had become entirely effaced. The conclusion of the trial was that Schall was condemned. ('Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1852, ii. p. 608; also Casper's ' Gerichtl. Med.,' 1, p. 116 ; and ' Vieteljahrsschr. fiir Gerichtl. Med.,' 1852, 1, p. 274, and 1853, 1, p. 338.) The singular part of this case is, that there was a want of proof that the deceased had really been tattooed; for neither the wife who had cohabited with the deceased for two years, nor his three married sisters, had ever seen any tattoo- marks on his skin. Chereau (' L'Union Med.,' Nov. 16, 1852) justly observes, respecting Casper's report, that it is not one which should influence a judicial decision, for it is not stated at what age, with what substances, and in what manner, the marks were produced in the four instances where there was complete obliteration. Were the men to be trusted? How many years had really elapsed before the marks had become effaced ? What was the nature of the colouring matter used ? Was it mineral or vegetable ? and was it carried deeply into the cutis, or only disposed on the surface? These questions should have received satisfactory answers before comparisons were made, and important medical conclusions were based upon them. Casper's un- qualified opinion that such marks, assuming them to have existed, might have spontaneously disappeared, led to the conviction and execution of Schall. The accused confessed his crime before execution, but the position assumed by Casper on this occasion is certainly not a precedent to be followed by medical jurists. In all cases in which an opinion is required of a medical man—whether tattoo-marks have been efiaced from the skin or not—there should be no doubt whatever touching their previous existence. A question may arise in contested identity, whether any accidental or temporary marks made on the skin can be mistaken for tattooing. This does not seem at all probable. The colour and the design might be imitated by water-colour pigments, but this would be only super- ficial, i.e. on the cuticle, and they would be readily removed with water. No professional man could be deceived by such an attempt at im- posture. It may be suggested that marks of tattooing said to have been seen by witnesses on the skin of a missing person were caused by the application of coloured chalk or pencil. Such an objection to evidence hardly needs serious refutation. Coloured marks could onjy be produced by very soft chalk, and would never have the depth, intensity, or appearance of tattooing. They would be removed and


[346/872 b22652516_0346.jp2]

TATTOOING. THE TICHBORXE CASE. 334 obliterated by the slightest friction. The most superficial observer could not be deceived by them. Again, it may be alleged of a missing person, by one set of witnesses, that he was tattooed, and by another set that they had had casual opportunities of seeing his skin and did not observe any tattoo-marks. In such a case, the evidence given by near relatives, whose opportunities of observation are much more frequent, is more reliable than that of persons who could have had only an opportunity of seeing the bare skin on some rare occasions, and could have had no particular reason at the time for observing its condition. This, of com'se, becomes simply a question of credibihty and accuracy of observation. A medical man may be consulted about the removal of these marks ; and when he has tried experiments on this subject he will be able to appreciate the view generally entertained of their indehbility. at least so far as the carbon-marks are concerned. Some years since the author was consulted in the following case. By an accidental discharge of gunpowder, a portion was blown into the face of a young man. After recovery from the first effects, a blueish-black tint was left on the lower part of the forehead, the nose, and the upper part of the cheeks and eyehds. He had consulted several physicians and surgeons, and. under their advice, had employed various local applications for the removal of the marks, but without result. On examining the discoloured parts a year after the accident with a magnifying-glass, it was obvious that the small particles of carbon were deeply and firmly imbedded in the cutis. Local applications to promote absorption were tried, but it was quite evident that nothing but the destruction of the cutis would remove the marks. Bhstering would have no effect, as this would only remove the cuticle. ; Medico-legal questions connected with the presence or absence of tattoo-marks on the skin have been hitherto confined to proof or dis- proof of the identity of persons charged with crime. Probably few cases in the present century have excited greater interest among the public or given rise to greater discussion than that which is known as the Tich- borne case, akeady referred to (see p. 324, ante). {Tichlorne v. JAishington, C. P., 1871-2; and Beg. v. Castro or Tichlorne, Aug. 1873.) The question involved turned entirely upon personal identity. A man calling himself Sir Eoger Tichbome claimed certain estates. This led to a trial of ejectment in the Common Pleas, which extended over one hundred and three days, in which he was nonsuited, and subsequently committed for trial on numerous charges of perjury. After a trial for this ofience of the unexampled duration of one hundred and eighty-eight days, the claimant was found guilty of perjury and sentenced to penal servitude. Roger Charles Tichborne was lost at sea in April, 1854. Xo one who sailed in the same ship has ever been seen or heard of afterwards. At the time of his departure from England, in 1852, the real Roger had upon the iaside of his left forearm certain tattoo-marks of a blue colour, representing a cross, a heart, and an anchor. These marks had been distinctly seen up to the time of his leaving England, over a


[347/872 b22652516_0347.jp2]

THE TICHBORNE CASE. 335 period of six years, by his mother, his tutor, and a number of friends, male and female, to whom he had at intervals purposely shown them. Lord Bellew, a schoolfellow of Roger's, deposed that in 1847-8 he saw the cross, heart, and anchor on Roger's arm, and that he himself tattooed the letters ' R C T,' in addition to these symbols. The letters were made with China-ink, and were half an inch in length. On the same day that he tattooed Roger's arm, Roger tattooed his arm with the mark of an anchor. This was done at the same time, and with the same materials. Twenty-five years had elapsed since they had thus tattooed each other, but the anchor was still there, and the witness showed his arm to the jury in confirmation of his statement. It was further proved that, as attempts had been made to bleed the real Roger in the arms, feet, and temples before he left England, there would be some cicatrices indicative of this fact. When a boy he had an issue in his arm for two years, and when this was removed and the part healed, it had left a large and deep cicatrix. These facts were deposed to by several credible witnesses. The depression in the arm, left by this issue, was seen by them as late as nine years after its removal. Such were the facts satisfactorily proved with regard to the real heir. Twelve years after the wreck of the Bella, in which Roger Tichborne was lost, the defendant Castro, who was residing in Australia, first set up a claim to the estates, announcing that he was Roger, and had been saved from shipwreck. This, however, was proved to have been after some adver- tisements had appeared in the Australian papers, offering a reward for the discovery of any survivor of the Bella. A large amount of evidence was received for and against the de- fendant's identity. It is only necessary to consider in this place the medical evidence derivable from tattoo-marks and cicatrices. There was no mark of tattooing about the person of the defendant, nor any appearance indicative of his having been tattooed. Lipscombe, his physician, had examined him and found no tattoo-marks, and, to add to the force of this evidence, the defendant himself denied that he had ever been tattooed. As to cicatrices, the evidence equally failed. Fergusson, who was a witness for him, and other surgeons, examined his arms, temple, and feet, but found no cicatrix such as would have followed bleeding. There were some scars on the feet near the ankles, but these had not been produced by incisions for bleeding in the feet. There was no scar or depression in the arm where an issue had been placed in the real Roger. Unless we are prepared to admit that a man can be tattooed and have no knowledge of the fact, and having been thus unconsciously tattooed, that all the marks had disappeared before he saw them, it is impossible that this claimant could have been the Roger Charles Tichborne, the heir to the estates. The durability of the marks was clearly proved by Lord Bellew. So, again, with regard to cicatrices. There were none to render the story of the defendant even plausible, and, taken together with the tattoo-marks, they were in flat contra- ! diction to his assertion. Resting upon these medical facts alone, there was sufficient to overthrow his claim and to prove him to be an im-


[348/872 b22652516_0348.jp2]

WOUNDS OF THE HEAD. 336 poster: but there was an accumulation of other evidence based upon the early history, education, travels, and habits of the lost heir, which clearly showed that this was a false claim. That this impostor should for so long a period have defied the law and deluded a large number of persons is in itself surprising. Pending the Tichborne trial, a man named Jean Luie presented himself as a witness for the defendant, and swore that he was on board the Bella with the defendant, and had escaped with him from the wreck. It was, however, proved that he was a ticket-of-leave convict named Lungren, who had been repeatedly in gaol, and was recognized by several gaolers. Lungren, according to the gaol-books, had a deformity of the little finger of each hand, and certain moles were upon his back. All these were found on the pretended Jean Luie. He was tried and convicted of thus endeavouring to defeat justice by flagrant perjury. Medical Responsibility.—The process of tattooing is not unattended with danger. Cases are recorded in which syphilis has been thus transmitted by inoculation. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1855, t. 1, p. 175.) Berchon collected four cases in which the operation proved fatal by reason of the after-consequences. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1870, t. 2, p. 464.) CHAPTEE 33. WOUNDS OF THE HEAD.—CONGUSSIQN.—HOW DISTINGUISHED PROM INTOXI- CATION.—EFFUSION OF BLOOD AS A RESULT OF VIOLENCE, DISEASE, OB MENTAL EXCITEMENT.—WOUNDS OF THE FACE.—DEFORMITY AS A CONSE- QUENCE OF WOUNDS OF THE FACE.—INJURIES TO THE SPINE AND SPINAL MARROW.—FRACTURES OF THE VERTEBRA. The danger of wounds, and their influence in causing death, are the two principal points to which the attention of a medical jurist must be directed. Wounds of the Head. Incised wounds, affecting the scalp, unless of great extent, rarely produce any serious effects. When the wound is contused, or accom- panied by much laceration of the skin, it is highly dangerous in conse- quence of the tendency which the inflammatory process has to assume an erysipelatous character. The results of these wounds are, however, such as to set all general rules of prognosis at defiance. Slight punctured wounds will sometimes terminate fatally in consequence of inflammation, followed by extensive suppuration; while, on the other hand, a man may recover from a lacerated wound by which the greater part of the flesh may have been stripped from the bone. There are two sources of danger in wounds of the scalp: 1. The access of erysipelatous inflammation. 2. Inflammation of the tendinous struc-


[349/872 b22652516_0349.jp2]

337 CONCUSSION OF THE BRAIN. tui'es, followed or not by a process of suppuration. Either of these secondary effects may be a consequence of slight or severe wounds, and prove fatal. Neither can be regarded as an unusual result of a severe wound of the scalp, but when one or the other follows a slight injury, there is reason to suspect that the patient may have been constitution- ally predisposed to the attack. Bad treatment may hkewise lead to a fatal result from a wound not serious in the first instance, but the question, how far the responsibility of an aggressor would be affected by a circumstance of this nature, has been considered in another place (p. 302). Wounds of the head are dangerous in proportion as they affect the brain; and it is rare that a severe contused wound is unaccompanied by some injury to this organ. There is, however, a difficulty which a practitioner has here to contend with—namely, that it is scarcely possible to predict from external appearances, the degree of mischief which has been produced within. These injuries, as it is well known, are capricious in their after-effects; the shghtest contu- sions may be attended with fatal consequences, while fractures, accom- panied by great depression of bone, and an absolute loss of substance of the brain, are sometimes followed by perfect recovery. Another difficulty in the way of forming a correct opinion consists in the fact that a person may recover from the first effects of an injury, but after some days or weeks he will suddenly die; and, on examination of the body, the greater part of the brain will be found destroyed b}'- sup- puration, although no symptoms of mischief may have manifested themselves until within a few hours of death. Concussion.—The common effect of a violent blow on the head is to produce concussion or effusion of blood, or both. Concussion is usually indicated by fainting, insensibility, or sudden death occurring immediately or soon after the application of external violence. In concussion, the symptoms come on at once, and the patient sometimes dies without any tendency to reaction manifesting itself. In the most severe form, the person drops at the very moment when struck, and dies on the spot. In other cases, he may linger in a state of insensibility for several days or weeks, and then die. In concussion, there is generally more or less vomiting. It is important to remember that neither compression nor obvious physical injury to the brain is necessary to render concussion fatal. This may be entirely dependent on shock to the nervous system. After death, no particular morbid change may be discovered in the body, or there may be merely the mark of a slight bruise on the head. The state of insensibility observed in concussion may be only apparent, and a slight degree of consciousness may be retained. A blow on the skull may cause death by leading to abscess in the brain, although there may be no fracture or other physical injury. A case of this kind proving fatal in about a week is reported. (' Lancet,' 1873, i. p. 697.) Inflammation may follow the primary shock from concussion, sup- puration may take place, and the patient die after the lapse of several weeks, or even months. It is necessary in a medico-legal point of view to notice that a person may move about and occupy himself, z


[350/872 b22652516_0350.jp2]

CONCUSSION AND INTOXICATION. 338 while apparently convalescent, for a week or ten days after recovery from the first shock, and then suddenly be seized with fatal symptoms and die. This apparent recovery leads to the common supposition, that death must have been produced by some intervening cause, and not by the original violence to the head—a point generally urged in the defence of such cases. When the inflammation that follows concussion is of a chronic character, the person may suffer from pain in the head and vomiting, and die after the lapse of weeks, months, or even years. Concussion may sometimes take place as a consequence of a violent fall on the feet, in which case the head receives a shock through the medium of the spinal column. The skull may be thereby extensively fractured at the base, and the brain may be even shattered by such a fall. This was the cause of death in the case of the Duke of Orleans, the son of Louis Philippe. In Allen v. The Chester By. Co. (Com. Pleas, Feb. 1857), the plaintiff claimed damages for an injury caused by a railway collision. The evidence showed that the plaintiff received a blow on the head. There were no immediate effects; but in two days he suffered from lightness of the head and other symptoms, attributed by his medical attendant to concussion of the brain, as a result of the accident. Subsequently there were symptoms of injury to the spine. There was pain in the course of the spine, partial paralysis of the bladder, rectum, and legs, with loss of memory. The medical witnesses for the plaintiff attri- buted these symptoms to a blow received by him at the base of the skull. The defendants contended that, if these were the results of concussion of the brain, they ought to have manifested themselves immediately on the occurrence of the accident; and this view was to some extent supported by the evidence of experienced surgeons. In substance, however, the medical evidence on the two sides was not conflicting. Concussion of the brain, as it is ordinarily known to surgeons, is generally attended with some immediate symptoms ; but the witnesses for the defence properly admitted that ' a concussion of the brain (and spine?), attended with apparently slight symptoms at first, might, under peculiar circumstances, be followed by serious symptoms.' As no other cause could be assigned for the symptoms, this was practically admitting that the plaintiff had suffered from the injury, the degree being simply a question for the jury. They returned a verdict for the plaintiff. Concussion distinguished from Intoxication.—The symptoms under which a wounded person is labouring may be sometimes attributed to intoxication, and a medical witness may be asked what difference exists between this state and that of concussion. The history of the case will, in general, suffice to establish a distinction, but this cannot always be obtained. It is commonly said that the odour of the breath will enable a surgeon to detect intoxication; but it is obvious that a man may meet with concussion after having drunk liquor insufficient to cause intoxication, or concussion may take place while he is intoxi- cated—a combination which frequently occurs. Under such circum- stances we must wait for time to develop the real nature of the case.


[351/872 b22652516_0351.jp2]

EXTRAVASATION OR EFFUSION OF BLOOD. 339 Concussion may be so slight as sometimes closely to resemble intoxica- tion, and, from the absence of all marks of violence to the head and the existence of a spirituous odour in the breath, the medical examiner might be easily deceived. If there be no perceptible odour in the breath, the presumption is that the symptoms are not due to intoxica- tion. On the other hand, intoxication may be so great as to give rise to the apprehension of fatal consequences, and the coexistence of a mark of violence on the head might lead to error in the formation of an opinion. What is the line of conduct to be pursued on such occasions? The examiner should weigh all the circumstances, and if there be one cause for the symptoms more probable than another, he should adopt it; if there be any doubt, this should be stated to the court. This mistake is still frequently made, and a person in a state of insensibility from violence or disease has had his death accelerated by confinement in a cell as a drunken person, when it subsequently transpires that he has not been drinking, and that he really requires medical aid. In the metropolis this aid is now usually sought by the police. There is nothing in the state of the brain in a dead body which will enable a practitioner to distinguish whether concussion or intoxication had existed and had been the cause of the symptoms. The vessels may be congested in both cases. The discovery of an alcoholic liquid in the stomach might lead to a presumption that the deceased had been intoxicated, while marks of violence on the head might favour the view that he had suffered from concussion. When both conditions are found, the examination of the body cannot lead to a solution of the question. The answer must then depend on the special circum- stances proved, and, if procurable, on the nature of the symptoms preceding death. It is to be feared that medical witnesses are not sufficiently careful on these occasions to determine whether there are signs of intoxication about an injured person. Subsequent proceedings may render this a material part of the inquiry. The distinction of apoplexy from drunkenness involves greater dif- ficulties. In these cases we have to deal with the true diagnosis of alcoholic or narcotic poisoning (see Opium, p. 163, ante). Jackson has directed attention to this medical question in a case reported in the ' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1871, i. p. 360. Some instructive cases, in reference to this complication of wounds, have been published by Tardieu. (See ' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xliv. p. 347.) Extravasation or Effusion of Blood.—A blow on the head may destroy life by causing an effusion of blood either on the surface or in the substance of the brain. In pugilistic combats, when a person is thus struck, he commonly falls, and death may take place in a few minutes. On inspection, blood may be found effused either at the base or in the ventricles of the brain, and the question will present itself—did the injury w^hich caused death arise from a Now or a fall ? A heavy blow on the head may cause fatal effusion of blood, but on these occasions the effusion commonly arises from the violent concussion which the injured person sustains by the fall. A medical witness will therefore


[352/872 b22652516_0352.jp2]

340 EFFUSION OF BLOOD FROM DISEASE OR VIOLENCE. in general be compelled to admit that the fatal effusion might have taken place either from a blow or a fall. If the fall has resulted from accident, and not from a blow, this will, of course, absolve the accused from responsibility for the fatal results. This subject has important applications in legal medicine, for this is one of the most common causes of death from injuries to the head, and there are many cases of this description tried. Effusion may occur from violence with or without fracture, and it may take place without being accompanied by any external marks of injury. In case of injury to the head proving fatal by effusion of blood on the brain, a person may recover from the first effects of the violence and apparently be going on well, when he will suddenlj'- become worse and die. Effusion takes place slowly at first; it may be arrested by the effects of stupor from concussion, by a portion of the blood coagu- lating around the ruptured orifices of the vessels, or by some other mechanical impediment to its escape; but after a longer or shorter period, especially if the person be excited or disturbed, the bleeding will recur and destroy life by producing compression of the brain. How many hours or daj^'s are required in order that such an increased effusion should take place after an accident, it is impossible to say; but in severe cases, it is generally observed to follow the injury within a short time. Astley Cooper has related the case of a gentleman who was thrown out of a chaise, and fell upon his head with such violence as to stun him in the first instance. After a short time he recovered his senses, and felt so much better that he entered the chaise again, and was driven to his father's house by a companion. He attempted to pass off the accident as of a trivial nature, but he soon began to feel heavy and drowsy, so that he was obliged to go to bed. His symptoms became more alarming, and he died in about an hour, as it afterwards appeared, from effusion of blood on the brain. When the brain has sustained laceration from violence, in addition to insensibility, convul- sions are frequently observed. Effusion of Blood from Disease or Violence.—Blood may be found effused in various situations within the interior of the skull, and the cause of the effusion may be either disease or violence. The skill of a medical jurist is often required to determine which of these causes is the more probable, as where, for instance, a pugilist has died, after having received severe injuries to the head, and his adversary is tried on a charge of manslaughter. On these occasions it is often urged, in the defence, that the bleeding might have arisen either from the diseased state of the vessels of the brain, or, if the evidence render it probable that the blow was the cause, that the effects of the blow were aggravated by a diseased condition of the vessels, or by the excitement into which the deceased was thrown, either from the effects of intoxi- cation or passion. (See case of Reg. v. Saxon, p. 296, ante.) When the brain is not lacerated by violence, the blood is effused either on the surface of the hemispheres, between the membranes, or at the base. When the effusion is caused by violence, the effused blood is not always found under the spot where the blow was inflicted, but occa-


[353/872 b22652516_0353.jp2]

WOUNDS OF THE HEAD. sionally, by counter-stroke on the surface of tlie brain, directly opposite to it—a case which a medical witness has frequently been required to explain on trials, and which depends on the same cause as fracture by counter-stroke, i.e. on a separation of parts (laceration of the brain, effusion of blood, or even fracture of the bones) at the point of the skull directly opposite to that which sustains the violence. Thus fracture of the base of the skull is frequently the result of severe violence applied to the top of the head (vertex). Effusions of blood from a diseased state of the vessels more commonly take place on the substance of the brain, but they sometimes occur on the surface of the organ as a result of mere excitement or over-exertion of the muscular powers. A diseased condition of the vessels, and probably a softening of the substance of the brain, will, on these occasions, be apparent on inspection. If the eftiision depend on disease, the arteries around may be found diseased, or the brain itself may be found softened and disorganized. The state of the brain and its vessels should be closely examined in all cases of alleged violence, since haemorrhage may take place either from excitement or heavy blows, wherever this diseased condition exists. It has occasionally happened, especially in old people, that the person has dropped down dead without a blow being struck, and that death has been wrongly imputed to violence. Cerebral haemorrhage from disease rarely occurs in persons under forty years of age. Frequent intemperance and violent passion may, however, easily create a ten- dency to it in younger persons. As an effect of violence it may take place in persons of all ages, but, when the marks of violence are slight, a witness must exercise great caution before he alleges that the effusion was produced by a blow, especially when it is found that the deceased was of intemperate habits. As a summary of these remarks, we may say that, in effusions of blood from violence, the blood generally issues from a vessel which is plainly seen to be torn, as the middle artery of the brain, or the lateral sinus. The effused blood is commonly found on the surface of the brain, and not in its substance, unless the organ is lacerated. When situate between the dura mater (outer membrane) and the skull, but especially when immediately below the seat of violence or directly opposite to it by counter-stroke, this is strong evidence, cceferis pari- bus, that it has proceeded from a blow. When there is a fracture of the skull, the presumption of the extravasation being due to violence is great; because this is not only a sufficient, but an obvious cause, while the idea of its having proceeded from disease only is remote and speculative. When, besides these conditions, there is no remarkable congestion of the brain in other spots, when the substance of the brain is firm, and the vessels are to all appearance free from disease, we have the strongest reason to believe that the effusion must have been due to violence, and to no other cause. The evidence given on some trials, when the main question has turned upon the cause of an eff"usion of blood on the brain, in the case of a person who has sustained violent injuries to the head, has rather


[354/872 b22652516_0354.jp2]

342 EFFUSION OF BLOOD FROM EXCITEMENT. tended to reflect disgrace on medical science. It has been made to appear from the mouth of the medical witness, either directly or by imphcation, that no sort of mechanical violence applied to the head of a man in a state of drunkenness or passion—of one whose cerebral vessels were probably diseased—could have had any effect in producing a fatal extravasation found in the head after death. In spite of an individual having received a violent blow with a bludgeon, sufficient to have killed a stout and vigorous man, or of his having been thrown with considerable force with his head against a stone floor, an unqualified admission is often made, that excitement alone, or drunkenness alone, would account for the effusion without reference to the blow. In putting the most favourable construction upon these cases, when we have clear evidence of great violence having been used to the head, with the presence of the usual post-mortem appearances, our opinion should be that the excitement or drunkenness might have predisposed to, but was not the immediate cause of, the cerebral haemorrhage. A mere inspection of the body does not always lead to the discovery of the cause of an effusion on the brain. The violence producing an effusion of blood may have been slight, and, unless attention is par- ticularly directed to the subject, it may be overlooked. The condition of the effused blood should be accurately noticed, in order to determine whether it presents any marks indicative of its being recent or of old standing. Spontaneous effusions, or eflusions from disease, are not easily distin- guished from those which are the result of violence to the head. Wilks has pointed out that in most instances of severe injury attended with effusion of blood, the structure of the brain is found bruised. In meningeal apoplexy (apoplexy of the membrane) the source of the blood is a vein of the pia mater, or inner membrane, and sometimes a large arterial trunk. The difficulty chiefly arises in those cases in which effusion is found after slight violence, and there is, at the same time, disease of the blood-vessels of the brain. Wilks gives the results of several inspections in which effusion was owing to disease, to violence, and to a mixed condition. (See ' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1859, p. 120.) Effusion of Blood from Excitement.—When engaged in the investi- gation of these cases, it is always a fair matter of inquiry whether the violence, upon the evidence, was not of itself sufficiently great to account for the effusion without the supposition of coexisting disease or excitement. Admitting that the rupture of a blood-vessel, and the extensive effusion of blood on the brain, may take place from simple excitement and passion, yet this is an event comparatively rare, at least in the young and healthy, while nothing is more common than that these results should follow violent injuries to the head, whatever the age or condition of the person. (See case of Heg. v. Saxon, p. 296, ante.) A medical witness should remember that on these occasions, if he is unable to say positively whether the effusion was due to the excitement or the blows, he will satisfy the court if he only states clearly that which is, in his own mind, the more probable cause of


[355/872 b22652516_0355.jp2]

EFFUSION OF BLOOD FROM EXCITEMENT. 343 death; and, by weighing all the circumstances of the case beforehand, he will rarely fail to find that one cause was more probable than the other. Thus, if a man, excited by passion, intoxication, or both, is struck on the head, and the blow is slight—such as an unaffected person would probably have sustained without injury—yet in this case insen- sibility and death follow, and, on examination, a quantity of blood is found effused in the substance of the brain: can it be a matter of ' doubt with the practitioner that the effusion was chiefly due to the excitement under which the deceased was labouring? To take a converse instance—a man engaged in a personal conflict with another is struck most violently on the head, or falls with great force on this part of the body; on an inspection it is found that death has arisen from effusion of blood on the surface of the brain, and it would be no unexpected consequence of the violence inflicted, that a similar appear- ance should be met with in an individual calm and unexcited : can the practitioner hesitate to say, under these circumstances, that the blow would satisfactorily account for the effusion, without reference to any coexisting causes of excitement ? In these criminal investigations, when a witness is examined in chief, he asserts, perhaps, that the effusion of blood was owing to a blow inflicted on the head. The counsel who cross-examines him, then puts the leading question, whether vessels may not be ruptured by excite- ment; he answers, without any qualification, in the affirmative, and thus produces an impression on the minds of the jury that excitement may have caused the rupture of the vessel in the particular case on which he is being examined. This is, of course, the sort of answer which a prisoner's counsel wishes to extract from a witness; and the effect produced by it on the court is not always removed, even by a careful re-examination. The counsel for the defence is well aware that, in a case of this description, his only chance of obtaining an acquittal is to throw a degree of doubt on the medical evidence, and to render it probable to a jury that the death of the deceased person was due to some other cause than the blow inflicted by the prisoner. As leading questions are allowed to be put to any extent in a cross- examination, the answer in the monosyllable ' yes ' or ' no ' generally carries with it much more than a medical witness intends. A medical witness should remember that he is sworn to state the whole truth. A qualified answer should be given to what is really a general question; and, supposing his opinion to be already formed on the subject on which his evidence is required, he should not, unless it be strictly consistent with his own views, allow his answer to a general question to be made applicable to a particular case. If, then, he is asked in cross-examination whether vessels might not be ruptured and blood extravasated by mere excitement^ he should answer that such an effect might undoubtedly follow; but that it was his opinion—and I am here supposing that his opinion has been founded upon a deliberate examination of all the medical facts—that excitement was not the cause of rupture and extravasation in the case in question. A witness has a right to insist that his evidence shall pass to the jury without having any designed ambiguity attached to it.


[356/872 b22652516_0356.jp2]

DATE OF EFFUSIONS OF BLOOD ON THE BRAIN. 344 Date of Effusions,—Recent effusions of blood are recognized by their red colour, and the consistency and appearance of the clot, or coagulum. After some days the clots acquire a chocolate or brown colour, and this passes gradually into an ochreous tint, which may be met with in from twelve to twenty-five days after the violence. ('Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1859, p. 122.) Coagula of effused blood also undergo changes in structure and consistency; when old, they are firmer, and there is much lymph, which is sometimes disposed in membranous layers of a fibrous structure, and these are adherent to the dura mater and the brain. The surface of this organ sometimes presents a mark indicative of pressure. When a medical man is required to give an opinion of the date of an effusion found on the brain, great caution is required. He may not be able to fix the precise date, but it may be in his power to say whether the blood has been effused for a few days, or for weeks, or months. When a blow on the head is of a heavy bruising kind, the whole substance of the skull may be fractured without a division of the skin. There is one remarkable circumstance connected with fractures accom- panied by depression of bone, which here requires to be mentioned— namely, that the person has been sensible so long as the foreign sub- stance which produced the fracture and depression remained wedged in the brain, and that insensibility and other fatal symptoms began to manifest themselves only after its removal. This being admitted, it may be urged in defence that death was really caused by medical interference. But it is a sufficient answer to state that the wounded person must have died from inflammation of the brain if the foreign body had been allowed to remain; and that it is consistent with the soundest principles of practice to remove all such foreign substances without delay. In fractures of the skull with depression, it may become a question whether the surgeon raised the depressed portion of bone so soon as he ought to have done. In the description of injuries of the head, it is impossible to avoid the use of terms with which members of the legal profession are not likely to be acquainted. In giving evi- Tig- 48. dence upon the situation of wounds, of ^^^^j^^^ the effusion of blood, and the effects of Mj^!^ a fractures, medical witnesses are often compelled to make use of anatomical & terms, and are not always successful in ^ - c explaining them. With the view of pji^frnrj^'''^^^ ^ removing this difficulty, and supplying, \) to some extent, the means of following The skull, with its outer and inner the evidence of a witness in his descrip- Jf,fbrS?meSSL?sri™ ii tion of injuries to the head and its con- section. tents, a diagrammatic engraving, repre- senting the relative position of the mem- branes of the brain, is annexed. Fig. 48 represents a section of the bones of the skull, with the three membranes which cover the brain, (a) Section of the skull-bones,


[357/872 b22652516_0357.jp2]

THE MEMBRANES OF THE BRAIN. 345 with the outer and inner tables, and the intermediate cellular structure or diploe, indicated by the dark shading ; the scalp, or skin of the skull, which covers the outer table, is not represented. (5) The dura mater, or outer membrane of the brain; it is thick and fibrous, closely ad- herent to the inside of the inner table of the skull, but smooth on the side towards the brain, (c) The arachnoid membrane, so named from its delicate web-like structure, forms a closed sac, covering the dura mater —to the inner surface of which it gives its glistening aspect—and also the pia mater on the surface of the brain, which it closely covers, without dipping into the convolutions, [d) The pia mater—the membrane which immediately invests the substance of the brain and dips into all the convolutions. It contains the blood-vessels which nourish the hemispheres of the brain. These membranes are, for distinctness, represented as being separated from each other, but they are naturally in close proximity, and the rough side of the dura mater is closely adherent to the inside of the skull (calvarium). The ordinary seats of the effusion of blood from violence are between the dura mater and inner table of the skull, and between the pia mater and the surface, or into the substance of the brain. In reference to persons found dead with severe injuries to the head, attended with fracture and effusion of blood on the brain, a medical man may be required to say whether such an amount of violence is or is not consistent with the retention of muscular exertion, and power of locomotion by the deceased. For instance, a man may fall from a height, and produce a severe compound fracture of the skull. He may, nevertheless, be able to rise and walk some distance before he falls dead. Under these circumstances there might be a strong disposition to assert that the deceased must have been murdered—the injuries being such that they could not have been produced by himself, there being at the same time no weapon near, and no elevated spot from which he could have fallen. The discovery, after death, of severe injury to the head, with great effusion of blood on the brain, must not, however, lead a surgeon to suppose that the person who sustained the violence had been immediately incapacitated. There are various cases recorded which show that a power to move has been retained under conditions which might be supposed to render a person incapable of moving from the spot. Full allowance must be made on these occasions for the possible exercise of locomotion by the deceased. Although a large quantity of blood may be found after death pressing on the substance of the brain, it does not follow that this effusion and pressure were the immediate results of the violence. (See case of Reg. v. Saxon, p. 296.) The importance of these observations will be further seen by the following case. A man was found dead in a stable with a severe frac- ture of the temporal bone, which had caused a rupture of the middle artery of the brain. A companion was accused of having murdered him, but he alleged that the deceased had fallen from his horse the day before, and had thus met with the accident. It appeared, however, that, after the fall, the deceased had gone into a public-house before he returned to the stables, and had remained there some time drinking..


[358/872 b22652516_0358.jp2]

34^ WOUNDS OF THE BRAIN AND FACE. The question respecting the guilt of the accused party rested upon the fact whether, after such an extensive fracture of the skull with extra- vasation of blood, it was possible for a man to do what the prisoner had represented the deceased to have done. Wallace very properly gave a qualified opinion; he said it was improbable, but not impos- sible, that, after receiving such an injury, the deceased could have walked into and drunk at a public-house. The extravasation was here the immediate cause of death, and probably this did not take place to the full extent, except as a consequence of the excitement from drinking. Wounds of the Brain.—Wounds of the brain, even when shght, sometimes prove instantaneously mortal, while in other cases recoveries take place from contused or punctured w^ounds of this organ, contrary to all expectation. When a person survives the first effects of the injury, there are two sources of danger which await him : 1. The production of so-called fungus from the exposed portion of the brain. 2. Inflammation and its consequences. The process of inflammation, it must be remembered, is very slowly established in this organ; it may not manifest itself until from three to ten weeks after the injury. In one remarkable case, where a child was accidentally shot through the brain, the ball having traversed both hemispheres, no symptoms of cerebral inflammation manifested themselves for twenty-six days. The child died on the twenty-ninth day. ('Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xxxix. p. 41.) Wounds of the Face.—Wlien wounds of the face are of any extent, they are usually followed by great deformity; and when they pene- trate the cavities in which the organs of the senses are situated, they often prove fatal, either by involving the brain and its membranes, or by giving rise to inflammation of this organ. Wounds of the eyebrows are not of so simple a nature as might at first sight be supposed. Besides being attended with deformity when they heal, they are liable, during the process of healing, to cause serious disorders of the neigh- bouring parts. Amaurosis and neuralgia are recorded among the secondary and not unusual consequences of such wounds, when the supra-orbital nerve has become implicated. Under certain conditions of the body, there may be inflammation of the parts within the orbit, extending to the membranes of the brain, and proving fatal by leading to the formation of pus within that organ. Amaurosis in the right eye has been known to occur from a contused wound, not of a violent nature, on the right eyebrow. Wounds apparently confined to the external parts of the face frequently conceal deep-seated mischief. A sharp instrument penetrating the eyelid, and passing upwards with force, will produce fracture of the orbital plate of the frontal bone, which is very thin, and even injure the brain beyond. Deformity as a Consequence of Wounds of the Face.—Wounds of the face, when at all extensive, are always followed, in healing, by greater or less deformity. A medical witness may, perhaps, find these questions put to him in relation to them—Is the wound likely to be attended with deformity ? Could such a wound of the face heal without deformity ?


[359/872 b22652516_0359.jp2]

INJURIES TO THE SPINE. 347 or; could the deformity, if it exist, have been produced by any other cause than the wound ? These questions are of importance. A person may allege that he was severely wounded in the face, when the medical witness may find no trace of such a wound as that described. Again, a person may seek damages from another in a civil action, alleging that a particular deformity was produced by a wound, when the medical witness may be able to trace its origin to disease, or to some accidental cause. Injuries to the Spine. The spinal marrow is liable to concussion from blows, to compression from fracture of the vertebrae or the effusion of blood, with all the secondary consequences attending such accidents. Concussion of the spinal marrow commonly produces paralysis, affecting the bladder, rectum, or lower limbs. These symptoms may not appear at once, but come on after some hours or days. After death no traces of mechanical injury may be discovered. Blows on the spine, unattended with fracture or dislocation, may be followed by inflammation and softening of the spinal marrow. A slight injury has thus been known to cause death, by giving rise to inflammation of the spinal marrow. This organ is also liable to compression from slight causes, and death may occur from paralysis of the nerves of respiration. Fractures of the Vertehrce.—These fractures are generally attended with displacement, and thus produce compression of the spinal marrow. They are the more rapidly fatal in proportion as the injury is high up in the vertebral column. The whole of the body becomes paralysed below the seat of injury, as a result of the compression of the spinal marrow. If the seat of compression is above the fourth cervical ver- tebra, death is commonly immediate; asphyxia then results from paralysis of the nerves which supply the diaphragm, and which are necessary to respiration. In falls on the summit of the head from a height, it sometimes happens not only that the skull is extensively fractured, but that the dentiform process of the second vertebra is broken off, owing to the head being doubled under the body. This injury to the second vertebra may be the cause of death. From a case related by Phillips, it would appear that this accident is not always attended with fatal compression of the spinal marrow. (' Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' Jan. 1838, p. 265.) In one instance the person survived fifteen months (ibid., Oct. 1845, p. 527); and in another, in which the fracture was caused by the patient turning in bed while his head was pressed on the pillow, death did not take place for sixteen months. On several criminal trials, this injury was proved to have been the cause of death; and in a case tried at Glasgow {Rex v. Beid, 1835), it became a material question, how far such a fracture might result from disease. It may happen that caries of the bone, or disease of the transverse ligament, will cause a separation of the dentiform process from the second cervical vertebra. The state of the bone in these alleged fatal accidents should, therefore, be closely examined. A slight cause may sometimes produce severe and fatal injury to the


[360/872 b22652516_0360.jp2]

348 WOUNDS OF THE CHEST. neck. A lunatic in a private asylum suddenly threw her head back, in order to avoid taking some food that was offered to her; and she fell dead, evidently from the compression produced by a sudden dis- placement of the dentiform process of the second vertebra. A woman died suddenly a month after her confinement; she had been suckling her child at one o'clock in the morning, and at four she was found dead. The viscera of the abdomen, chest, and head were carefully examined, without the discovery of any morbid appearance to account for death, when, as the brain was being returned into the skull, one of the inspectors noticed a projection at the foramen magnum. On further examination, the dentiform process of the second vertebra was found to have been displaced, and this had so injured the spinal marrow as to destroy life. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. iii. p. 582.) It is not stated whether the bone was in a healthy or diseased condition. In fractures of the vertebrae, a person is generally so disabled, whatever may be the situation of the fracture, that he cannot walk or exert himself. Injuries to the spine and its contents are generally the result of falls or blows, either on the head or the lower part of the column. The secondary consequences of these injuries are sometimes so insidious as to disarm suspicion, and death may take place quite unexpectedly some weeks after the accident. Spicula of bone, separated by fractures, may remain adherent for some time; and, by a sudden turn of the head, be forced off, and destroy life by penetrating the spinal marrow, at a long period after the infliction of the injur}\ This has been known to happen in fractures involving the margin of the foramen magnum, and in such cases death is immediate. The s'pinal marrow has been in some instances wounded in its upper part b}'' sharp-pointed instru- ments introduced between the vertebrae. Death is an instantaneous result when the wound is above the third cervical vertebra: there is no part of the spine where a weapon can so easily penetrate as this, especially if the neck be slightly bent forward. The external wound thus made may be very small, and if produced with any obhquity by drawing aside the skin, it might be easily overlooked, or it might be set down as superficial. CHAPTER 34. "WOUNDS OP THE CHEST.—WOUNDS AND RUPTURES OF THE LUNGS AND HEART.—WOUNDS OP LARGE BLOOD-VESSELS.— WOUNDS AND RUPTURES OP THE DIAPHRAGM.—DIRECTION OP WOUNDS OF THE CHEST.—WOUNDS OP THE ABDOMEN.—DEATH FROM BLOWS ON THE CAVITY.— RUPTURES OF THE LIVER, GALL-BLADDER, SPLEEN, KIDNEYS, INTESTINES, STOMACH, AND URINARY BLADDER.—WOUNDS OF THE GENITAL ORGANS. Wounds of the Chest.—Wounds of the chest have been divided into those which are confined to the walls and those which penetrate the cavity. . Incised or punctured wounds of the walls of the chest are rarely


[361/872 b22652516_0361.jp2]

WOUNDS OF THE LUNGS. 349 followed by dangerous consequences. The bleeding is not considerable, and is generally arrested without much difficulty. They heal either by adhesion or suppuration, and, unless their effects are aggravated by incidental circumstances, the person recovers. Contusions or contused wounds of the chest are, however, far more dangerous, and the danger is in a ratio to the degree of violence used. Such injuries, when severe, are ordinarily accompanied by fractures of the ribs or sternum; by a rupture of the viscera within the cavity, including the diaphragm; by profuse bleeding; or, as an after-effect, by inflammation of the lungs, with or without suppuration. Fractures of the ribs are dangerous for several reasons: the bones may be splintered and driven inwards, thereby wounding the lungs and causing haemorrhage, or leading to inflammation of the pleura or lungs. The intercostal arteries may also be wounded. In fractures of the upper ribs, the prognosis is less favourable than in those of the lower, because commonly a mtich greater degree of violence is required to produce the fracture. A simple fracture of the sternum, or chest-bone, without displacement of the bone, is rarely attended with danger, unless the concussion has at the same time produced mischief internally, which will be known by the symptoms. When, however, the bone is depressed as well as fractured, the viscera behind may be mortally injured. In a case of depressed fracture of the sternum, the person died after the lapse of thirteen days; and on inspection it was found that the fractured por- tion of bone had produced a transverse wound of the heart about an inch in length. The cavities of the organ had not been penetrated, but the piece of bone was exactly adapted to the depression produced by it on the parietes. (Devergie, ' Med. Leg.,' t. 2, p. 243.) A witness will frequently be required to take into consideration the effects of contusions on the thorax, with or without fracture, in cases of death from pugilistic combats, which formerly gave rise to numerous trials on charges of manslaughter. Wounds penetrating into the cavity of the chest are generally dangerous, even when slight, in consequence of the numerous accidents with which they are liable to be complicated. In these wounds, the lungs are most commonly injured; but, according to the direction of the weapon, the heart, or the great vessels con- nected with it, as well as the gullet or thoracic duct, may share in the mischief. Wounds of the Lungs.—The immediate cause of danger from wounds of these organs is haemorrhage, which is profuse in proportion to the depth of the wound and the size of the vessels wounded. Should the weapon divide any of the trunks of the pulmonary veins, the individual may speedily sink. The degree of haemorrhage cannot be determined by the quantity of blood which escapes from the wound; for it may flow internally, and collect within the cavity of the pleura, impeding respiration. This is especially to be feared when the external orifice of the wound is small and oblique, and one of the intercostal arteries has been touched by the weapon. A wound of the lung is generally known, among other symptoms, by the frothiness and florid colour of the blood which issues from the orifice, as well as by the expectoration


[362/872 b22652516_0362.jp2]

350 WOUNDS OF THE HEART. of blood. The lungs may sustain serious injury from a blow or fall, and yet there may be no external marks of violence or symptoms indicative of danger for some hours. When death occurs during the convalescence of a person who has survived the first effects of a pene- trating wound of the chest, the surgeon should observe whether it may not have been caused either by imprudence on the part of the patient, or by abuse of regimen, or other misconduct; for circumstances of this nature may be occasionally treated as mitigatory on the trial of an assailant. In all cases where a person is progressing to recovery, a relaxation of regimen should be made with great circumspection. Too much nourishment, too frequent talking, or any exertion, are circum- stances that may cause a renewal of the bleeding and extravasation. Wounds of the Heart.—Wounds of the heart are among the most fatal of penetrating wounds of the chest. It was formerly considered that all wounds of this organ were necessarily and instantly mortal. Undoubtedly, when either of the cavities is laid open to a large extent, the bleeding is so profuse on the withdrawal of the weapon, that death must be immediate. But when the wound is small, and penetrates into the cavities of the heart obliquely, life may be prolonged for a consider- able period; and cases are on record in which it is probable that such wounds would have healed, and the patients have finally recovered, but for the supervention of other diseases which destroy life. It was the opinion of Dupuytren that these injuries were not neces- sarily fatal, although, with perhaps one exception, there is no case on record in which a person has recovered from a penetrating wound of the cavities of the heart. Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' Oct. 1844, 557; also ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1846, t. 1, p. 212.) There are few, probably, who will be inclined to consider them curable; a remote possibility of simple wounds healing, and of the patient recovering, may be admitted, but until some clear instances of recovery from penetrating wounds of the cavities are reported, the majority of practitioners will continue to look upon them as fatal. From a series of cases collected by OUivier and Sanson, it appears that out of twenty-nine instances of penetrating wounds of the heart, only two proved fatal within forty- eight hours. In the others death took place at the varying periods of from four to twenty-eight days after the infliction of the wound. (Devergie, ' Med. Leg.,' t. 2, p. 253.) These differences in the time at which death occurs, as well as the fact that wounds of the heart do not instantly destroy life, has been ascribed to the peculiar disposition of the muscular fibres of the organ, and to the manner in which they are penetrated by a weapon. It appears from the observations of OUivier and others, that the right cavities of the heart are more frequently wounded than the left, and of these the right ventricle is most com- monly the seAt of injury. Out of fifty-four cases of wounds of this organ, twenty-nine were situated in the right ventricle, twelve in the left ventricle, nine in the two ventricles, three in the right auricle, and one in the left auricle. These differences are readily accounted for by the relative situation of the cavities. It appears also that wounds of the right ventricle are not only the most frequent, but of all others


[363/872 b22652516_0363.jp2]

WOUNDS OF THE HEART. they are the most rapidly fatal. It is considered that the suddenness of death in severe wounds of the cavities of this organ is to be ascribed, not merely to the loss of blood, but to the degree of compression which the heart experiences from that which escapes into the bag of the peri- cardium. In reference to the direction of penetrating wounds of the chest, it may be proper to state that the base of the heart corresponds to the upper margin of the third rib on the left side; and the apex to the lower margin of the fifth rib on the same side. A penetrating wound of the heart was formerly considered to be instantaneously mortal, and the usual medical opinion at coroners' inquests was that a person so wounded must have dropped down dead on the spot. More accurate observations have, however, shown that this is an erroneous, and in medico-legal practice, a highly dangerous doctrine. The Due de Berri, who was murdered in Paris in 1820, survived eight hours after having received a wound of the left ven- tricle. Other and more remarkable instances of survivorship have been recorded; and it may be stated that, although, in a surgical view, a question of this kind is of little importance, the case is very different in legal medicine. Upon it may depend the decision of questions relative to suicide, murder, or justifiable homicide. Watson met with a case in which a man who had been stabbed in the right ventricle ran eighteen yards after having received the wound. He then fell, but was not again able to rise; he died in six hours. On dissection, it was found that a punctured wound had extended into the right ven- tricle in an obliquely transverse direction, dividing in its course the coronary artery. The pericardium was nearly filled with blood. When the cavities of the heart, especially the auricles, are exten- sively laid open, death is likely to be an immediate result; but persons who have sustained wounds of this organ have frequently lived suffi- ciently long to exercise a power of voHtion and locomotion. In refer- ence to penetrating wounds (stabs), little or no blood probably escapes from the heart in the first instance, but it may afterwards ooze gently, or suddenly burst out in fatal quantity. It must not, therefore, be supposed, when a person is found dead with a wound of the heart, attended with abundant haemorrhage, either that the flow of blood took place in an instant, or that the person died immediately and was utterly incapable of exercising any voluntary power. Boileau met with a penetrating wound of the heart in a soldier, accidentally in- flicted with a knife. The man did not think it serious, but laughingly ascended fifteen steps, and commenced to run to the hospital, a distance of two hundred yards; then fell, and died in five minutes. The peri- cardium, or bag of the heart, was found full of blood. The knife had entered the front surface of the right ventricle, pierced the septum, and passed out through the left ventricle near the apex. (' Lancet,' 1879, i. p. 560.) In 1879, a boy was admitted into Guy's Hospital with a bayonet-wound which had penetrated through the front wall of the right ventricle, which was transfixed. The bayonet had then pierced the septum, and entered the left ventricle. It pierced the mitral valve also, and entered the left auricle. The boy survived for forty-two hours, but was mostly in an unconscious state.


[364/872 b22652516_0364.jp2]

352 RUPTURES OF THE HEART. Minute wounds of the chest in the region of the heart are sometimes made with the intention of destroying the Hves of infants or children. A woman was committed for trial (C. C. C, Jan. 1877) under the following circumstances. She was charged with endangering the hfe of her infant, three months old, by thrusting a needle into its side between two ribs and near the heart. A surgeon was called to the child, and he extracted a long needle from the chest. In his opinion it could not have come there by any accident, and force must have been used to push it in. This woman failed in her attempt at murder by her ignorance of the situation of the heart. Strange as it may appear, a fatal wound of this organ by a needle may be the result of accident. The following case, communicated by May of Newcastle- upon-Tyne, occurred under his observation in 1876. A mother was clasping to her bosom her child, two years of age, forgetting that she had just placed in her dress a needle, two inches long, with which she had been sewing. The child screamed: she observed part of a needle with thread fall to the ground, and on removing the child's clothes, there was a red spot near the nipple, but no trace of blood. May could find no trace of the broken needle, but considered that about an inch and a half had been broken off and was imbedded in the substance of the heart. There is no doubt that this accidental wound was the cause of death. The heart is liable to be ruptured either from disease or accident. In the latter case, the organ generally gives way towards the base, and through one of its cavities on the right side. Hope asserted that in ruptures from natural causes, it is the left side of the heart, and par- ticularly the left ventricle, in which a rupture is most frequently found. The symptoms are sudden pain, collapse, cramps, cold extremities, and rapid death. According to the circumstances under which they occur, cases of rupture from disease may excite a suspicion of death from violence. Sometimes the substance of the heart may be found to have undergone fatty degeneration. As a medico-legal subject, it is worthy of note that when this alarming accident proceeds from blows or falls, it is not always accompanied by marks of external violence, or any fracture or other visible injury to the exterior of the chest. A girl, set. 5, was knocked down and run over by a cart. When brought to the hospital she was quite dead, and there was no mark of injury upon any part of the bod}^ On inspection, the pericardium was found to be full of blood, which had issued from a transverse rent across the apex of the heart. Both ventricles were laid open ; the muscular substance was torn to a greater extent than the pericardium. The ribs were not fractured. The natural causes of rupture of the heart are violent mental emotions, such as anger, fright, terror, paroxysms of passion, sudden or excessive muscular efforts, or violent physical exertions in constrained positions. The heart, like any other muscle, may also give way from its own powerful contraction. When the heart is in a diseased condition, any slight causes of excitement are sufficient to produce rupture and sudden death. The mere exercise of walking rapidly or running may thus give rise to fatal consequences, but


[365/872 b22652516_0365.jp2]

353 WOUNDS OF ARTERIES AND VEINS. death may take place quite suddenly while the person is at rest. A man, set. 36, who had had no previous symptoms of illness, died suddenly during the night. On inspection, a rent, half an inch in length, was found in the right ventricle of his heart. The walls of the ventricle were soft and thin. There was a large effusion of blood, which accounted for death. (' Lancet,' 1872, ii. p. 41.) Another case of sudden death from rupture of the left ventricle is recorded in the same journal. (Ibid., p. 524.) In both cases sickness was an early symptom. Wounds of Arteries and Veins.—Wounds of the large arterial and venous trunks around the heart must be considered as mortal: death is generally speedy from the sudden and profuse bleeding which attends them. With regard to these fatal effusions of blood within the chest, as well as in the other great cavities, it may be mentioned that, from whatever vessel or vessels the blood may have issued, it is not com- monly found coagulated to any extent. The greater part of it generally preserves the liquid state, and it is rare that so much as one-half of the quantity effused is met with in the form of coagulum. These effusions of blood in the chest may be sometimes traced to wounds of the intercostal and the internal mammary arteries, or of the vena •azygos. • ' Wounds of the carotid arteries have been considered elsewhere in reference to wounds of the throat (p. 257). Questions relative to the power of locomotion perhaps more frequently occur with respect to wounds of the blood-vessels of the neck than of the heart—suicide and murder being more commonly perpetrated by the infliction of such wounds. Wounds of the carotid arteries are often pronounced in- stantaneously mortal. A witness may deliberately state that the person could not possibly have survived an instant. This is a very hazardous opinion, for it occasionally comes out, on inquiry, that if Buch a wound had been instantaneously mortal, then, in defiance of rational probability, or of the strongest presumptive evidence to the contrary, the deceased must have been murdered. A medical opinion of this kind has not only been refuted by circumstances, but by the evidence of eye-witnesses. There are several cases on record which show that wounds involving the common carotid artery and its Ij branches, as well as the internal jugular vein, do not prevent a person ! from exercising voluntary power, and even running a certain distance, i There is another circumstance which requires notice in relation to severe wounds in the throat—namely, that, although a person may , have the power of locomotion, he may not be able to use his voice so as to call for assistance. It sometimes excites surprise at an inquest, I how a murder may in this way be quietly committed without persons lin an adjoining room hearing any noise; but the fact is, that when the windpipe is divided, the voice is lost. I In Beg. v. Gooch (Northampton Ass., Nov. 1877), it was proved that Ithe prisoner had attacked the deceased with a knife, and had produced a severe wound in the arm. The medical evidence showed that it was a punctured wound about five inches in depth, involving the brachial 2 A


[366/872 b22652516_0366.jp2]

DEATH FROM ENTRANCE OF AIR INTO VEINS. 354 artery. He lost a large quantity of blood, but a medical man arrived in time to tie the artery and thus prevent death from haemorrhage. In three days, however, gangrene set in, and the man died from this secondary cause. The prisoner was held responsible, and found guilty of manslaughter. He had, it seems, aimed at the arm, thinking the stab would not be likely to cause death. In reference to severe wounds involving blood-vessels, while we may allow that persons may survive for a sufficient time to perform various acts of volition and locomotion, yet the presence of a mortal wound, especially when of a nature to be accompanied by a great loss of blood, must prevent all struggling or violent exertion on the part of the wounded person; such exertion we must consider to be incompatible with his condition. A medical jurist may thus have it in his power to determine whether a mortal wound found on the deceased has or has not been inflicted for the purpose of murder. On wounds of other blood-vessels, whether arteries or veins, it is unnecessary to make any further remark. Death is generally owing to loss of blood, and the bleeding from a comparatively small vessel may prove fatal, according to its size, situation, and the state of the wounded person. Death from the Entrance of Air into Wounded Veins.—In wounds of veins there is an occasional cause of death which requires a remark, namely, the entrance of air by the open mouth of the divided vessel. It has been long known that air injected into the jugular vein would destroy life by interfering with the functions of the heart. According to some, the air rushes into the cavity of the vessel owing to atmo- spheric pressure during the expansion of the heart, while others believe it to be dependent on aspiration in the act of breathing; but in some alleged cases of this kind, death has been probably caused by loss of blood. When the bleeding is slight, and the hissing sound is heard at the time of the incision, it may fairly be ascribed to the entrance of air. This opinion would be confirmed by the discovery of a frothy state of the blood in the right cavities of the heart. From the experi- ments of Tillaux, it appears that the injection of air into the proximal or distal end of the femoral artery of dogs produces complete paralysis of the hind legs. A post-mortem examination showed haemorrhage and softening limited to a single point in the spinal cord. To explain the production of this effect by the injection of air into the distal end of the artery, he supposes that the air cannot pass through the capil- laries into the veins, but finds its way by anastomosing arteries into the aorta, and thence into the arteries supplying the cord. After an injection of air into the carotids, patches of red softening are found in the different parts of the brain, but especially in the medulla oblongata and pons Varolii. The death of the animal is often very rapid. ('Lond. Med. Rec.,' 1873, p. 376.) According to some, death has arisen from want of contractile power in the right ventricle, occasioned by its distension with air; this may, no doubt, assist in producing the result, as over-distension of either cavity of the heart vdll cause paralysis of its walls. But according to Pavy the more immediate cause is the fact that air will not circulate through the capillaries like blood; the


[367/872 b22652516_0367.jp2]

WOUNDS AND RUPTURES OF THE DIAPHRAGM. 355 air, therefore, entering the capillaries of the lungs, blocks them up, and puts an end to the free circulation of the blood. A man was committed on a charge of manslaughter to the Chester Aut. Ass., 1885; but the ^rand jury returned no true bill. The deceased man, Rowbotham, and the accused. Hinds, had several scuffles and falls during a quarrel, the deceased falling uppermost. After the last fall, the deceased was suddenly seen to be in a fit, and died in a few moments. On examina- tion, there were a few external injuries, one of which was a small wound over the root of the nose. There was general emphysema of the body, and air had by some means gained access to the heart and general circulation. The point of entrance of the air could not be ascertained, and was attributed to some injury inflicted on the air- passages during the struggle. Wounds and Ruptures of the Diaphragm.—The diaphragm, or mus- cular partition between the chest and abdomen, is liable to be wounded either by weapons which penetrate the cavity of the chest or abdomen, or by the ribs when fractured through violent blows or falls; but, under any circumstances, wounds of this muscle are not likely to occur without implicating other important organs that are in contact with it. It is scarcely possible, therefore, to estimate the danger of these injuries abstractedly, as a medical opinion must materially depend on the concomitant mischief to the adjoining viscera. Slightly penetrating wounds of the diaphragm may heal hke those of other muscular parts: and cases of this kind are on record. There is, however, especially when the wound is of a lacerated kind, a consecutive source of mischief which no remedial means can avert, namely, that after the wound has, I to all appearance, healed, the hfe of a person may be cut short by the strangulation of a portion of the stomach or bowels in the half-cicatrized aperture. In a case of this description, when death occurs at a long period after the infliction of a wound, the witness may probably be required to say whether the wound was the cause of death, or whether there were any other circumstances which would have caused or facili- tated the production of a hernia. The degree of responsibility of an aggressor may materially depend upon the answers returned to these questions. Phrenic hernia, as this form of internal rupture is termed, is not by any means an unusual or unexpected fatal consequence of a wound of the diaphragm; and therefore it would appear at first sight I that death, at whatever period this event may occur, should be referred to the original wound. But the case may present some difficulties, as ' it is possible that a slight blow on the stomach, received subsequently |j to the wound, or even any violent exertion on the part of the deceased, might have produced the fatal strangulation. A person may survive with a large phrenic hernia for a considerable period, and die from some ; other cause. It has been stated that a person is completely incapacitated ; and rendered incapable of exertion or locomotion by a rupture of the I diaphragm. This statement, however, has been based on limited observa- j tion. The general effect of such an injury is to incapacitate a person, I but cases are recorded in which, in spite of the rupture, a person has I possessed the power of moving and walking to a considerable distance.


[368/872 b22652516_0368.jp2]

356 WOUNDS IN THE CHEST. WOUNDS OF THE ABDOMEN. The most serious injuries to the diaphragm are unquestionably those which are produced by violent contusions or falls on the abdomen, at a time when the stomach and intestines are distended. In these cases the muscular fibres may be ruptured to a greater or less extent; but the bleeding is not considerable, rarely exceeding two, three, or four ounces. A uniform result of these ruptures^ when extensive, is a protrusion of the stomach into the chest, with sometimes a rupture of its coats and extravasation of its contents. Severe lacerations of the diaphragm are more readily produced during the act of inspiration than during expiration—the fibres of the muscle being then stretched, and receiv- ing, while in this state of tension, the whole of the force of the blow. According to Devergie, the rupture most frequently takes place in the central tendinous structure, where it is united with the left muscular portion above the crura. He has remarked that it occurs more com- monly on the left side than on the right. (Op. cit., t. 2, p. 260.) It has been supposed that death would be an immediate consequence of this accident; but this view is not supported by facts. In a case of extensive rupture of the diaphragm, related by Devergie, in which the •stomach and colon were found in the chest, the person lived nine months after the only accident which could have produced it, and then died from another cause. Besides the stomach, it sometimes happens that the liver, spleen, or intestines pass through the opening, and, hke it, these organs are liable to become strangulated; the lungs are at the same time so compressed that respiration is stopped, and asphyxia, or suffocation, may be an immediate result. Direction of Wounds in the Chest.—In judging of the direction taken by wounds which traverse the chest from front to back, it is necessary to remember the great difference that exists in the level of the same rib anteriorly and posteriorly. This must be especially attended to when we are called upon to state the direction of a traversing wound from the description of it given by another. The point here referred to had an important bearing in the case of a fatal gunshot-wound, which was the subject of a criminal charge many years ago. (Henke's ' Zeitschr.,' 1836.) It must not be forgotten that a wound immediately below the sternum, or chest-bone, will in its fore part involve the viscera of the abdomen, in the back part those of the chest, and in its central part it will traverse the diaphragm ; owing to the great obliquity of the ribs, the upper edge of the sixth rib behind being on a level with the upper edge of the third rib in front, when standing. Wounds of the Walls of the Abdomen.—Incised and punctured wounds, which affect the parietes or coverings of the abdomen, without penetrating the cavity, are not quite of so simple a nature as might at first sight be imagined. The danger is immediate if the epigastric artery be wounded; for a fatal haemorrhage will, in some instances, take place from a wound of this small vessel. Among the sources oiF danger from superficial wounds, is inflammation, followed by suppura- tion beneath the tendinous membrane which covers the abdominal muscles. The matter formed is very liable to accumulate within the sheath of the muscles, and this may prove fatal unless proper treatment


[369/872 b22652516_0369.jp2]

357 WOUNDS OF THE ABDOMEN. be adopted. The inflammation will sometimes extend to the peri- toneum, and thus rapidly destroy life. As improper medical treatment may, in either of these cases, cause a superficial wound of the abdomen to fatally terminate, so, when a person stands charged with having inflicted such a wound, it will be necessary for a medical witness to consider how far the consequences of the act of the prisoner have been aggravated by wilful neglect or unskilfulness. But when these wounds take a favourable course and heal, there is an after-effect to be dreaded, namely, a protrusion of the viscera at the cicatrized spot, constituting ventral hernia. When the wound has involved the muscular fibres transversely to their course, the cicatrix which follows is commonly far less capable of resisting the pressure of the viscera within than other parts of the parietes. A hernia may take place, and this, like, other herniae, if neglected, is hable to become strangulated, and lead to the destruction of life. The walls of the abdomen, owing to the protrusion of this cavity, are easily penetrated by pointed instruments, and it requires but a slight force to traverse them completely and wound the intestines. A slight wound may thus prove fatal by causing peritoneal inflammation. Contusions on the cavity of the abdomen are attended generally with far more serious effects than on the chest. This arises from the coverings of the abdomen having less power to resist external shocks. In the first place, death may be the immediate result of a blow in the upper and central portions; no particular morbid changes may be apparent on inspection, and the violence may have been so shght as not to have produced any ecchymosed mark on the skin. Death has been ascribed in these cases to a fatal shock transmitted to the system through a violent impression produced on the great nerve-centre— called the solar plexus. Some remarks have already been made on sudden death from blows on this part of the abdomen (p. 291). Travers, Alison, Watson, Cooper, and other writers on surgical injuries have referred to cases of this kind as of not unfrequent occurrence. They are of considerable importance in a medico-legal point of view, as, in the absence of marks of physical injury on the part struck, a jury might be led to doubt whether the blow could have been the cause of death. Some surgeons have thought that these cases have not been accurately observed, and that in those which terminated fatally, a more careful inspection would probably have shown visible changes in the organic structures. The fact, however, remains: persons have died soon after receiving severe blows on the upper part of the abdomen, and the medical men who have examined the bodies for the express purpose of detecting physical injuries, have not found any to record. Moreover, they have not found in any part of the body a natural cause of sudden death. {Beg. v. Stone, Durham Wint. Ass., 1872.) Blows on the abdomen, when they do not destroy life by shock, may cause death by inducing peritoneal inflammation. Violence of a severe kind applied to the abdomen is not always indicated by ecchymosis or injury to the skin. Effusions of blood in the sheaths and tendinous coverings of the muscles may or may not be indicative of violence.


[370/872 b22652516_0370.jp2]

358 RUPTURES OF THE LIVER. One fact must here be borne in mind, to prevent mistakes in examining a body after death, namely, that blood may be found copiously effused in and around the abdominal muscles, quite irrespective of the applica- tion of violence. (Reid's ' Physiol. Researches,' p. 511.) The absence, in these cases, of ecchymosis or abrasion of the skin is sufficient to show that such extensive eff"usions are not caused by violence. Blows adequate to produce a laceration of the vessels, and haemorrhage, would most probably be attended with ecchymosis, and some visible injury to the skin. At any rate, when such marks of violence are not visible, and there is no evidence of a blow having been struck, a witness will act wisely in declining to attribute the mere effusion of blood to the act of another person. Deeply penetrating wounds of the abdomen are generally fatal by reason of the injury done to the intestines and other organs. Ruptures of the Liver.—Blows on the abdomen may prove fatal by causing a rupture of the liver or other viscera, with extravasation of blood; and, as it has been elsewhere stated, these serious injuries may occur without being attended with any marks of external violence (p. 291). Of all the internal organs, the liver and spleen are the most exposed to rupture, owing to their compact structure, which prevents them from 3delding to a sudden shock, like the stomach and intestines. Ruptures of the liver may occur from falls or blows; but this organ may be ruptured merely by a sudden action of the abdominal muscles. This accident is more likely to occur when the liver has undergone fatty degeneration, or is in an otherwise diseased state. In Dec, 1885, a case was referred to the editor where a woman (Pink) died of ursemic convulsions after delivery. There was rather extensive haemorrhage into the substance of the liver, and beneath its investing capsule, apparently as the result of the violent muscular contractions. Ruptures of the liver are generally seen on the convex surface and in the anterior margin, seldom extending through the whole substance of the organ, but consisting of fissures varying from one to two inches in depth. The right lobe, from its size, is more usually affected than the left. Their usual direction is from before backwards, with a slight obliquity; they rarely intersect the liver transversely. The lacerated edges are not much separated, while the surfaces present a granular appearance. But little blood is met with in the laceration; it is commonly found effused in the lower part of the cavity of the peritoneum, or in the hollow of the pelvis, and is only in part coagulated. Ruptures of the liver, unless they run far backwards and involve the vena cava or portal vein, are not in general attended with any considerable effusion of blood ; but the bleeding, should this vessel be imphcated, is sufficient to cause the instant destruction of life. Under other circumstances, a person may survive some hours or days, as the blood sometimes escapes slowly, or it may be suddenly effused in fatal quantity as a result of violent exertion or of fresh violence applied to the abdomen. A man came into Guy's Hospital, in whom there were no immediate or urgent symptoms. He was sent away, and a few hours afterwards he was found dead in a cell at the police-station. On inspection, the liver was


[371/872 b22652516_0371.jp2]

RUPTURES OF THE SPLEEN. 359 found lacerated nearly through its diameter, and a basinful of blood was found effused in the cavity of the abdomen. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1864, ii. 527.) This large effusion must have taken place after the man had left the hospital. Kuptures of the liver generally prove fatal within forty-eight hours. On the other hand, death may be a slow result of this injury. In one case, a man is reported to have died from a rupture of the hver which had occurred from an accident eight years before. (' Med.-Chir. Rev.,' 1836, p. 296.) A case occurred to Wilks in which a patient in Guy's Hospital survived this serious accident ten days. The question has frequently arisen whether a person, having a rupture of the liver, can walk or exercise the power of locomotion. A case above mentioned shows that this injury does not prevent locomotion. Other cases illustrating these facts are recorded in medico-legal works. In Reg. v. Chatfield (Maidstone Wint. Ass., 1874), the prisoner was proved to have maltreated his wife, by kicking her in the abdomen while she was in a drunken state. There was evidence that she had walked after the infliction of this violence. The liver was found ruptured, and there were extensive bruises over this part of the abdomen. The medical witness denied that the deceased could have walked with a ruptured liver, and there- fore in his opinion the kicks did not cause the rupture. This was the main ground of the defence; but it was utterly inconsistent with all the other facts of the case, and the prisoner was very properly found guilty of manslaughter. Wounds and ruptures of the gaU-Uadder are necessarily attended with the effusion of bile. This irritant fluid finds its way into the cavity of the abdomen, and the person dies from peritonitis. In the Walworth murder case (see p. 298, ante) a minute puncture of the gall-bladder, and the consequent escape of bile into the peritoneal cavity, was the unsuspected cause of death. Buptures of the Spleen.—A rupture of this organ may be produced by bruising violence directly applied to that part of the abdomen in which it is situated; and, as in other ruptures of the abdominal viscera from violence, the skin may not present any mark of contusion. In spite of this well-known fact, a case seldom comes to trial in which the defence is not made to rest upon the absence of marks of blows over the region of the ruptured organ. In Reg. v. Chapman (C. C. C, Sept, 1877), it was proved that the deceased woman had sustained violence at the hands of the prisoner, and after death the spleen was found ruptured. There was no mark of a blow corresponding to the rupture; nevertheless, the jury were satisfied with the medical evidence of the cause of death, and found the prisoner guilty of manslaughter. When the spleen is in a diseased condition from softening or enlarge- ment, it is easily ruptured by shght muscular exertion, as in suddenly turning the body to avoid a fall or a blow. Several fatal cases of this kind are reported. This is an important fact in a medico-legal view. An assailant might be wrongly charged with manslaughter, while the rupture might be due to muscular pressure on a diseased spleen.


[372/872 b22652516_0372.jp2]

360 RUPTURES OF THE KIDNEYS AND INTESTINES. (' Brit. Med. Jour.' 1878, i. p. 641, ii. p. 469.) The healthy organ is only liable to rupture by direct violence. Ruptures of the Kidneys.—The kidneys are occasionally ruptured from violence ; but this appears to be a rare accident. A rupture of the kidney may be produced without causing any prominent symptoms, and prove fatal in a few hours. It may be remarked generally that ruptures of the liver, spleen, and kidneys, unless attended with immediate and copious bleeding, are not inconsistent with a person having the power to move and walk. In a case which occurred at Guy's Hospital, a man retained the power of walking for some distance, although, on inspection after death, one kidney was found torn in halves from an accident. Ruptures and Wounds of the Intestines.—Ruptures of the intestines sometimes occur from disease; and, in a case of rupture alleged to have been produced by violence, we must always take this possible objection to our opinion into account. The ruptured part of the bowel should be carefully examined, in order to see whether there are any signs of ulceration or softening about it. If not, and there is clear evidence of violence having been used, it is impossible to admit this speculative objection. If with the proof of violence there should also be a diseased condition of the bowel, we may be required to say whether this did not create a greater liability to rupture—a point which must be generally conceded. That a rupture of the intestines is not incompatible with the power of locomotion, is proved by a case related by Ellis of Dublin, where the caicum was ruptured; the man was able to walk after the accident, but he died in twenty-four hours. Other instances of this kind are reported by Henke. The ileum is observed to be most liable to rupture from accident. A man was brought into Guy's Hospital. He was able to walk to his bed, and he did not appear to be seriously injured, although it was stated that a bale of wool had fallen on him. In the evening he became collapsed, and he died twelve hours after his admission. On inspection, about a pound of blood was found effused in the abdomen, and a portion of the ileum was found lacerated—the laceration extending into the mesentery and including the blood-vessels. The laceration was about an inch and a half long, and the bowel was divided not quite through. The intestines were much matted together by lymph and blood, the result of peritoneal inflammation. There had been only shght extra- vasation of the contents. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1861, ii. p. 271; also ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1878, t. 1, p. 137.) Croker King reported two fatal cases of ruptured jejunum—one arising from a kick on the abdo- men and the other from an accidental fall. King has observed that persons who have sustained this injury retain for a time the power of locomotion and muscular exertion. Such punctured wounds as merely touch the bowels without laying open the cavity, are liable to cause death by peritonitis. These injuries to the intestines sometimes destroy hfe by shock; there is but little blood effused, and the wounded person dies before peritonitis can be set up. Severe wounds to the intestines may, however, be inflicted


[373/872 b22652516_0373.jp2]

RUPTURES OF THE STOMACH AND BLADDER. 361 almost without the consciousness of the individual, and the wounded person may be able to walk a considerable distance. ('Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. 46, p. 24.) Wounds arid Ruptures of the Stomach.—Wounds and ruptures of the stomach may cause death by shock. Ruptures commonly give rise to severe pain, which of itself is sufficient to bring about rapid dissolution. The stomach may, however, be ruptured from spontaneous causes, as in cases of ulceration resulting from disease; but sometimes there is no morbid cause apparent. Penetrating wounds of the stomach gene- rally prove rapidly mortal, and seldom form a subject for medico-legal investigation. A singular case was tried at the Norwich Assizes in 1832, in which a man was charged with the murder of his wife by throwing at her a red-hot poker. The weapon completely perforated her stomach, and the woman died in six hours. Ruptures of the Bladder.—This injury, which has on many occasions given rise to medico-legal discussion, is frequently the result of blows or kicks on the lower part of the abdomen. The principal questions in reference to the accident are—Was the rupture the result of wilful violence or of an accidental fall ? or, did it proceed from spontaneous causes, or from over-distension ? The spot in which rupture commonly takes place is in the upper and back part, where the bladder is covered by the peritoneum. The aperture is sometimes large, at others small; but the effect is that the urine is effused, and death takes place sooner or later from peritoneal inflammation. It is commonly stated that ruptures, when attended with extravasation of urine into the peritoneal cavity, are uniformly fatal; but if the rupture occurs in the under part of the bladder, so that the urine finds its way into the cellular tissue, the medical opinion is not so unfavourable. The usual period at which death occurs from this accident is in from three to seven days; but Ellis met with a case in which the person did not die until the fifteenth day. A person may die suddenly from this injury, as a simple result of shock. When ruptures of the bladder are produced by blows they are rarely accompanied by marks of ecchymosis, or of injury to the skin. Thus, then, there may be no means of distinguishing, by external examina- tion, whether a rupture was really due to violence or to spontaneous causes. Those who are unacquainted with this fact might be disposed to refer the rupture to disease, on the supposition that violence should always be indicated by some visible external injury; but there are numerous cases on record which show that this view is erroneous (p. 291). Rupture of the bladder has been caused by a fall in wrest- ling, proving fatal in four days. {Reg. v. Warlurton, Carhsle Lent Ass., 1876.) 1 As an attempt may be made, in cases in which death has resulted I from this injury, to refer rupture of this organ to natural causes, it may be observed that this is a very unusual occurrence; a rupture is almost always the result of violence directly applied to the part while the organ is in a distended state. A spontaneous rupture may, how- I ever, occur: 1. When there is paralysis, with want of power to expel


[374/872 b22652516_0374.jp2]

362 CAUSES OF RUPTURE OF THE BLADDER, the nrine. 2. When the bladder is ulcerated or otherwise diseased. 3. When there is an obstruction in the urethra from stricture or other causes. The causes of spontaneous rupture are easily recog- nizable by ascertaining the previous condition of the deceased, or by examining the bladder and urethra after death. If a man were in good health prior to being struck; if he suddenly felt intense pain, could not pass his urine afterwards, and died from an attack of peritonitis in five or six days; if, after death, the bladder was found lacerated, but this organ and the urethra were otherwise in a healthy condition; there can be no doubt that the blow must have been the sole cause of rupture and death. In such a case, to attribute the rupture to spontaneous or natural causes would be absurd. As to the absence of marks of violence externally, this would be a difficulty only to those who had not previously made themselves acquainted with the facts attending this and other accidents affecting the viscera of the abdomen (p. 357). Nevertheless, a medical witness must be prepared to hear the same line of defence continually brought forward, as it is always the object of a counsel to make the best of a case for the prisoner. With medical facts, opinions, and doctrines he does not concern himself, so long as they do not serve his purpose. A diseased state of the bladder might probably diminish the responsibility of an accused person for the consequences; therefore the state of this organ should be closely looked to on these occasions. A distended state of the organ can be no mitigatory circumstance, since it is only when the bladder is in this condition that rupture is liable to occur. This can hardly be regarded as an abnormal condition of the organ. An accidental fall forwards over a hard surface when the bladder is distended with urine may lead to rupture. The person generally ex- periences at the time intense pain in the lower part of his abdomen, and there is an inability to pass the urine. Although a man is liable to be rendered powerless on sustaining a rapture of the bladder from a heavy blow or fall, there are several well-authenticated cases on record which prove that a man may walk some distance, and move about even for two or three hours afterwards. In punctured and incised wounds of the bladder the urine is at once extravasated, but in gunshot-wounds the extravasation does not com- monly take place until the sloughs have separated. Thus life may be protracted longer in cases of gunshot, than under other wounds of the bladder. For the discovery of exti^avasated liquids or blood, in wounds and other injuries to the abdominal viscera, we must look to the cavity of the pelvis, as it is here that, for obvious reasons, such liquids have a tendency to collect. Wounds of the Genital Organs.—Wounds of these organs do not often require the attention of a medical jurist: such wounds, whether in the male or female, may, however, prove fatal to life by excessive bleeding. Self-castration or mutilation is sometimes observed among male lunatics and idiots. When timely assistance is rendered, a fatal result may be averted. Demarquay met with a case in which a man in a fit of intoxication cut ofi' the whole of his genital organs with a


[375/872 b22652516_0375.jp2]

WOUNDS OF THE GENITAL ORGANS. razor. He lost much blood, from the effects of which he died on the following day. (' Lancet,' 1872, ii. p. 10.) The practice of circumci- sion on infants is sometimes followed by fatal results. Schwartz met with two cases of boys, eight days old, who were submitted to this rite. They both died of phlegmonous inflammation, one five days and the other twenty-five days after the operation. (' Lancet,' 1870, ii. p. 471.) Other fatal cases are reported. Incised, lacerated, or even contused wounds on the female genitals may prove fatal by loss of blood, not from the wound involving any large vessel, but from the numerous small vessels divided. When deeply incised wounds are inflicted upon the genital organs of either sex, the fact of their existence in such a situation at once proves wilful and dehberate mahce on the part of the assailant. Accident is wholly out of the question, and suicide is improbable, except in cases of confirmed idiocy, lunacy, or intoxication. Such wounds require to be carefully examined; for the proof of the kind of wound, when fatal, may be tantamount to a proof of murder. A practitioner may be sometimes required to determine whether wounds affecting the female organs have resulted from accident, have been self-inflicted, or inflicted by others with homicidal intention. Accidental wounds of the genitals, unless all the circumstances are known, may sometimes resemble those produced by design, and thus the distinction of a homicidal from an accidental or a self-inflicted wound on the female organs is sometimes attended with great difficulty. A girl, set. 6, fell from a tree with her legs apart upon one of the sharp-pointed shoots below, about half an inch thick. This entered the vagina, and passing through its posterior wall, broke off. A woman removed the wood with some difficulty. The child died in twenty-eight hours from peritonitis. ('Lancet,' 1871, ii. p. 74.) Had this child been found dead with the wood in her body, there might have been some difficulty in assigning an accidental origin to such an injury. (For remarks by Toulmouche on the wounds of the male genital organs, see 'Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1868, t. 2, p. 110; and for cases in which such wounds were homicidally inflicted upon males, see * Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1848, 1.1, p. 443; also 1865, 1.1, p. 66; and for a case which led to a trial for the murder of a woman, see ' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. 44, p. 813.) In Reg. v. Green (Derby Wint. Ass., 1872), the medical evidence established that there was a punctured wound of the genitals in a female, and this had caused death by haemorrhage ; but it could not be clearly shown whether it was the result of accident or homicide. Unless all the circumstances are known, an accidental injury to the genital organs may present the characters of homicidal violence. In another part of this work (p. 246) will be found reported a case im. which an accidental wound on the genital organs of a girl did not prove fatal, and an attempt was made by the parents to attribute it to intentional violence. Certain persons were charged with mahciously wounding the girl, but a surgical examination of the wound showed that this was a false charge. It has been said that lunatics, idiots, or intoxicated persons might


[376/872 b22652516_0376.jp2]

WOUNDS OF THE GENITAL ORGANS. inflict upon themselves wounds unlike those produced in ordinary attempts at suicide. A case was tried at Glasgow in 1873, in which a man was charged with the murder of his wife. They were both in- toxicated when they went to bed. The prisoner during the night called to one of his daughters to come to her mother, who had been taken ill. She found her lying on the floor, and blood was flowing from her, and there was also some substance which proved to be intestine. A surgeon who was called found a clean-cut wound in the vagina, through which a portion of the bowel, with clean-cut ends, protruded. Seven feet and seven inches of intestine had been cleanly cut ofi" in three I pieces; they were not ragged. The woman died at the end of the week from loss of blood and peritonitis. The man was charged with I this act; but were these injuries self-inflicted, or were they the result of i homicide? It was admitted that suicide was possible, but not probable. The woman's hands were covered with blood, but the man's were not. The man was of good character. There was no known motive for either suicide or murder, and they had been married forty years, and were much attached to each other. No weapon was found with which the wound could have been inflicted. Two pocket-knives were in the trousers of the man, but there was no mark of blood upon them, and it was not thought probable that the wound had been inflicted with either. The woman had made a dying declaration, obviously false, which was that the wound had been caused by her falling over a chair, n that no person injured her, and that she and her husband had always I been on friendly terms. The jury returned a verdict of ' not proven.' (' Lancet,' 1873, i, p. 673.) Contused Womids on the female genitals may prove fatal by the laceration of parts leading to great loss of blood. Several trials for manslaughter have taken place, in which this was proved to have been the cause of death. In Beg. v. Lewis (Maidstone Lent Ass., 1876), the prisoner was charged with having caused the death of his wife by kicking her in the lower part of the abdomen. She died in a few days from inflammation. The medical witness considered that violence was the cause of death, although he would not positively swear to it. Lord Coleridge thereupon made this important observation to the jury : ' It is not because there may be the absence of absolute demonstration, which from the nature of human affairs can hardly ever be had, that therefore you should not act on your conviction. Did the violence cause death ? What else could have caused it ? What other cause is suggested that could have caused it ? ' The prisoner was convicted. There may be such a loss of blood in these cases as to destroy life, although no large blood-vessel may be implicated in the injury. A' contused wound on the vulva may occasionally present an ambiguous | appearance, and be mistaken for an incised wound. When the soft parts of the body are struck by a blow or kick, if there is a bony surface beneath, a longitudinal rent resembling a cut may appear as a result of i the force being received by the bone. A kick on the vulva or a fall on this part may produce a similar injury, and, unless carefully examined, may lead to the erroneous inference that a weapon has been used for


[377/872 b22652516_0377.jp2]

FEACTURES. THEIR CAUSES. its production. Some women are subject to frequent discharges of blood from the genital organs from natural causes. When the bleed- ing immediately follows a blow, and the woman has not been subject to such a discharge, the fair presumption is that violence was the cause; but when the flow of blood appears only a long time after the alleged violence, of which no traces can be seen, it is most probably due to natural causes. A case of this kind was communicated to the author by Procter. There was no difficulty in giving an opinion that the flow of blood was not due to violence. It may be alleged in defence that the injuries found on the body were inflicted after death, and not while the deceased was living. Kicks or blows on the vulva, if they destroy life at all, cause death by copious eflPiision of blood. Violence to this part after death would not produce such an effhsion as would account for death. There are also other distinguishing characters which have been elsewhere pointed out. CHAPTER 35. FRACTURES.—PRODUCED BY A BLOW WITH A WEAPON OR BY A FALL.— ! BRITTLENESS OP THE BONES.—FRACTURES CAUSED BY SLIGHT MUSCULAR EXERTION.—FRACTURES IN THE LIVING AND DEAD BODY.—HAS A BONE EVER BEEN FRACTURED?—LOCOMOTION.—DISLOCATIONS FROM VIOLENCE OR NATURAL CAUSES.—MEDICAL OPINIONS.—ACTIONS FOR MALAPRAXIS. Fractukes. Fractures of the bones have some important bearings in relation to medical jurisprudence. They may result from falls, blows, or the spontaneous action of muscles. Causes.—Questions are sometimes put, whether a particular frac- ture was caused by an accidental fall or a blow; and, if by a blow, I whether by the use of a weapon or not. It is obvious that the answers must be regulated by the circumstances of each case. In examining a fracture, it is important to determine, if possible, whether a weapon has or has not been used ; and this may be sometimes ascertained by ; the state of the parts. It is a common defence, on these occasions, to attribute the fracture to an accidental fall. Fractures more readily i occur from equal degrees of force in the old than in the young, and in ! the young rather than in the adult; because it is at the adult period I of life that the bones possess their maximum degree of firmness and ; solidity. The bones of aged persons are sometimes very brittle, and slight violence will then produce fracture. This has been regarded as an extenuating circumstance, when the fracture produced by a slight : blow was followed by death. Certain diseases, such as syphilis, arthritis, cancer, scurvy, and rickets, render bones more fragile; but i they are sometimes preternaturally brittle in apparently healthy per- sons, and this brittleness {fragilitas ossium) appears to be hereditary.


[378/872 b22652516_0378.jp2]

366 i SPONTANEOUS FRACTURES. In such cases, a defence might fairly rest upon an abnormal con- dition of the bones, if the violence producing the fracture was shght. i Several trials have taken place in which this brittleness of the bones I became a subject of inquiry. In a case of fractured skuU leading to I death from inflammation of the brain, it was proved that the bones | of the skull were thin and brittle, and this led to a mitigation of ^ punishment. (' Dub. Med. Jour.,' 1839, p. 289.) The orbital plate of the frontal bone is very thin, and it may be fractured by a blow on the eye. Death may, under these circumstances, result from inflammation of the brain. According to Mercer, in cases of general paralysis of the insane, there exists simultaneously a condition of the bones which renders them liable to fracture under comparatively slight violence. (* Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1874, i. p. 540.) The author was not aware of any facts to support this statement. Patients in asylums have been found dead with numerous fractures of the ribs, and those who had the custody of them have been convicted of manslaughter. It is scarcely possible in such cases to determine the amount of violence used, but on a post- mortem inspection it would not be difficult to determine, by the ex- amination of a bone, whether this brittleness really existed or not. Brittleness of the bones does not excuse an act of violence, although it may mitigate the punishment when it has been proved to exist. At the same time, the attendants on the insane suffering from general paralysis should be careful not to use force in such cases. Spontaneous Fractures.—In a case in which there is no appearance of disease, a fracture may be ascribed to spontaneous causes. Thus bones have been fractured by moderate muscular exertion. The elbow (olecranon), heel-bone (os calcis), and knee-pan (patella) are particu- larly exposed to this accident. The long bones are seldom the subject of an accident of this kind ; but the arm (humerus) in a healthy man • has been broken by the simple muscular exertion of throwing a cricket- )l ball. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xvi. p. 659.) A young lady fractured the neck of the scapula by suddenly throwing a necklace round her neck. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' 1842, vol. i. p. 60.) In 1858, a gentleman, aet. 40, was in the act of bowling at cricket, when, on delivering the ball, he and some bystanders heard distinctly a sharp crack like the breaking of a dry piece of wood. He fell to the ground as if he had been shot. The thigh-bone was found to be fractured, and evidently from muscular exertion only. No person can meet with an accident of this kind with- out being generally instantly conscious of it. In 1889 Humphry communicated to the editor a case in which an elderly man stepped otF a chair after turning off" the gas. He walked upstairs, and on proceed- ing to undress, for the first time perceived blood oozing through his stocking. He had unknowingly sustained a compound fracture of ; the tibia. It is probable that in these instances, if there were an oppor- tunity of examining the bone, it would be found to have undergone some change in its composition, which had rendered it brittle. A case of spontaneous fracture of the femur was brought into Guy's Hospital in 1846. A healthy man, set. 33, of temperate habits, was in the act of placing one leg over the other to look at the sole of his foot, when he


[379/872 b22652516_0379.jp2]

FRACTURES IN THE LIVING AND DEAD BODY. 367 heard something give way, and the right leg immediately hung down. On examination, it was found that the right thigh-bone had been trans- versely fractured at the junction of its middle with the lower third. This case is remarkable inasmuch as spontaneous fractures of the thigh- bones are very rare, and the man had not suffered from any of those diseases which cause preternatural fragihty, and the fracture was not caused by violent muscular exertion. Even the end of the heel-bone (os calcis) has been broken off by the powerful action of the muscles of the calf of the leg in making a false step. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1878, vol. i. p. 128.) The actual condition of the bone was, of course, unknown; but it healed readily, and the man left the hospital at the usual period. In fractures arising from this cause there would be no abrasion of the skin, nor any appearance to indicate that a blow has been struck; while the marks of a blow would, of course, remove all idea of the fracture having had a spontaneous origin. It is most unusual that the ribs should be fractured from muscular exertion; but a case occurred to Groninger, which shows that this accident may really occur. It is one of medico-legal importance, inasmuch as the injury might be easily ascribed to violence; but the absence of any external appearances indicative of a blow would render it probable that this was not the cause. Fractures of limbs are not dangerous to life, unless, when of a com- pound nature, they occur in old persons, or in those who are debilitated by disease or dissipated habits. They may then cause death by induc- ing irritative fever, erysipelas, gangrene, tetanus, pyaemia, or delirium tremens. Fractures in the Living and Dead Body.—It is not always easy to say whether a fracture has been produced hefore or after death. A fracture produced shortly after death, while the body is warm, and another produced shortly before death, will present similar characters, except that in the former case there might be less blood effused. A fracture caused ten or twelve hours before death would be indicated by a copious effusion of blood into the surrounding parts and between the fractured edges of the bones, as well as by laceration of the muscles; or if for a longer period before death, there may be the marks of inflam- mation. Fractures caused several hours after death are not accom- panied by an effusion of blood. A medical witness maybe asked—How long did the deceased survive after receiving the fracture ? This is a question which can be decided only by an examination of the fractured part. Unless the person has survived eighteen or twenty-four hours, there are commonly no appreciable changes. After this time, lymph is poured out from the surrounding structures. This slowly becomes hard from the deposition of phosphate of calcium, and forms what is called a ' callus.' In the process of time, the callus acquires all the hardness of the original bone. The death of a person may take place during these changes, and a medical man may then have to state the period at which the fracture probably happened, in order to connect the violence with the act of a particular person. Unfortunately, we have no satisfactory data, if we except the extreme stages of this process of


[380/872 b22652516_0380.jp2]

FRACTURES. 368 repair, upon which to ground an opinion. We can say whether a per- son hved for a long or a short time after receiving a fracture, but to specify the exact time is impossible ; since this process of restoration in bone varies according to age, constitution, and many other circum- stances. In young persons, bones unite rapidly; in the old, slowly; in the diseased and unhealthy, the process of union is slow, and some- times does not take place at all. In those who are at the time affected with a mortal disease, there may be no attempt at reparation. Accord- ing to Villerme, the callus assumes a cartilaginous structure in from sixteen to twenty-five days; and it becomes ossified in a period varying from three weeks to three months. It requires, however, a period of from six to eight months for the callus to acquire all the hardness, firmness, and power of resisting shocks possessed by the original bone. A force applied to a recently united bone will break it through the callus or bond of union, while, after the period stated, the bone will not break there more readily than through any other part. It is generally assumed that the period required for the union of a simple fracture in the adult is, for the thigh-bone, six weeks; for the tibia (leg), five weeks; for the humerus (upper arm), four weeks; and for the ulna and radius (fore- arm), three weeks ; for the ribs, about the same period; but cases have been known in which the ribs had not perfectly united in two months, and in some fractures of the other bones it was found that union had not taken place in four months. In a case which occurred to Reid, a fracture of the tibia—the principal bone of the leg—healed in three weeks. Has a hone ever been fractured ?—This question is sometimes put in reference to the living body. It is well known that a bone seldom unites so evenly that the point of ossific union is not indicated by a node or projection. Some bones are so exposed as to be well placed for this examination, as the radius, the clavicle, and tibia,—these being but little covered by skin; in others, the detection is difficult. It is impossible to say when the fracture took place; it may have been six months or six years ago, as, after the former period, the bone undergoes no perceptible change. These facts are of importance in relation to the dead as well as to the living; since they will enable us to answer questions respecting the identity of skeletons found under suspicious circumstances; and here medical evidence may take a wider range, for a fracture in any bone may be discovered, if not by external examination, at least by sawing the bone longitudinally through the suspected broken part, when, should the suspicion be correct, the bony shell will be found thicker and less regular in the situation of the united fracture than in the other parts. So, in such cases, it will be easy to say whether a fracture is recent or of old standing. Locomotion.—With respect to the power of locomotion after a frac- ture, it may be observed that, when the injury is in the arm or in the ribs—unless many of the ribs are broken or the fractures are on both sides—a person may be able to move about, although he is unfitted for struggling or making great exertion. Fractures of the leg generally incapacitate persons from moving, except to short distances. (See case


[381/872 b22652516_0381.jp2]

2 B DISLOCATIONS. DETECTION OF FRACTURES. by Syme, ' Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' 1836, vol. 46, p. 255; also another in whicli one bone of the leg was fractured, and a power of walking some miles was retained, ' Amer. Jour. Med. Sci.,' 1845, p. 484.) The reader will find additional information on this subject in the ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1839, t. 2, p. 241; 1844, t. 2, p. 146 ; and in Fried- reich's ' Ueber die Knochen in forensischer, Beziehung,' Ansbach, 1853. Dislocations. Dislocations are not fi'equent in the old or in those persons whose bones are brittle. They rarely form a subject for medico-legal investi- gation. A witness is liable to be asked, what degree of force, and acting in which direction, would produce a dislocation—questions not difficult to answer. These injuries, except those of the vertebrae of the neck, are not dangerous to life, unless of a compound nature, when death may take place from secondary causes. A dislocation which has occurred in the living hody may be known after death by a laceration of the soft parts in the neighbourhood of the joint, and by the copious effusion and coagulation of blood. (For an account of the appearances presented by dislocation of the shoulder five days before death, see ' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xxxi. p. 266.) If of old standing, a disloca- tion would be identified by the cicatrices in surrounding structures. Dislocations may occur from natural causes^ as from disease and destruction of the ligaments in a joint; also from violent muscular spasm during an epileptic convulsion. Dymock met with an instance of dislocation of the shoulder forwards during puerperal convulsions. (' Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' 1843, vol. 69, p. 302; see also ' Lancet,' 1845, i. p. 440.) A power of locomotion may exist, except when the injury is in the lower limbs; but it has been observed that, for some time after a dislocation of the hip-joint, considerable power over the limb remains; it is only after a few hours that the limb becomes fixed in one position. Exertion with the dislocated member is in all cases out of the question. Detection of Fractures. Malapraxis.—There are certain fractures of an obscure kind which closely resemble dislocations. This has been pointed out by Astley Cooper,'in relation to fractures of the anatomical neck of the humerus (upper arm-bone). (' Guy's Hosp. Kep.,' 1839, p. 272.) This accident might easily be mistaken for a dislocation of the shoulder. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xxxvi. p. 38.) In attempting to reduce the bone, the head continually falls back into the axilla. In such a case an action for malapraxis might be brought against a surgeon. It could only be by a dissection of the part after death that the real nature of the case would be ascertained. It is requisite, therefore, that great caution should be used in giving an opinion. The same observa- tions apply to fractures of the neck of the thigh-bone, although with less force, because this is a more common accident in older persons. It is well known that fractures and dislocations, when cured, are often attended with some slight deformity of the limb, or with some impair- ment of its functions. This result is occasionally inevitable under the best treatment; but it is commonly set down as a sign of unskilfulness


[382/872 b22652516_0382.jp2]

370 GUNSHOT-WOUNDS. in a medical attendant. An action for malapraxis is instituted, and, in spite of good evidence in his favour, the surgeon is sometimes heavily fined for a result which could not be avoided. There is often great injustice in these proceedings, and the present system of allowing each party to select his own medical witnesses often leads to a conflict of opinion and evidence. CHAPTER 36. GUNSHOT-WOUNDS.—IN THE LIVING AND DEAD BODY.—WAS THE PIECE FIRED NEAR OR PROM A DISTANCE?—ACCIDENTAL, SUICIDAL, OR HOMICIDAL WOUNDS.—POSITION OP THE WOUNDED PERSON WHEN SHOT.—WOUNDS PROM SMALL-SHOT.—WOUNDS PROM WADDING AND GUNPOWDER. Gunshot-WOUNDS are of the contused kind, but they differ from other wounds in the fact that the vitality of the parts struck by the projectile is destroyed, and this leads ultimately to a process of sloughing. The medico-legal questions which arise out of gunshot-wounds are similar to those which have been examined in relation to other wounds. , They are dangerous to life, especially when they penetrate or traverse any of the great cavities of the body. Death may take place directly, either from loss of blood or from shock; although immediate or copious bleeding is not a common character of these injuries. Death from shock is occasionally witnessed. Indirectly, these wounds are attended with much danger; sloughing generally takes place uniformly through- out the whole of the parts perforated, and inflammation or fatal bleeding may cut life short. If the person survives the first effects, he may die at almost any period from suppurative fever, erysipelas, gangrene, or , from the results of operations absolutely required for his treatment. | Gunshot-wounds may thus destroy life after long periods of time. A medical witness may be asked whether the wound was inflicted shortly before or soon after death. It is by no means easy to answer this question, unless the bullet has injured some vessel, when the effusion of blood and the formation of coagula, will indicate that the person was living when it was received. If a gimshot-wound has been | produced in a dead body, no blood will be efliised unless the bullet | strikes a large vein. j If the person survives the injury, and the bullet can be felt in an I accessible spot, it should, if possible, be removed. (See the case of Beg. V. Kelly, p. 310.) In addition to the use of Nelaton's probe (unglazed china) for detecting a bullet which was used on that occasion, a chemical method has been suggested. Lint moistened with vinegar, and secured to a flexible stem, may be introduced into the wound and allowed to remain for a short time in contact with the supposed , bullet. It is then withdrawn, and placed in contact with a solution of iodide of potassium. If a leaden bullet was in the wound, it would


[383/872 b22652516_0383.jp2]

DETECTION OF BULLETS. produce a precipitate of the yellow iodide of lead. Desneux employed this method in three cases. It must be borne in mind that death may occur from a pistol-shot, with no external wound. Ogston, jun., reports a case in which the bullet, in a case of suicidal pistol-shot, had passed through the soft palate, then through the basilar process of the occipital bone, traversed the medulla oblongata at the base of the brain, and, striking the internal occipital protuberance, had passed forwards and upwards through the brain till it reached the frontal bone. The bullet had then sunk backwards, and was found lying on the surface of the brain. (' Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' vol. 29, 1884-5, p. 720.) Was the piece fired near or from a distance f—A gunshot-wound produced by the muzzle of a piece being placed near to the surface of the body has the following characters: there may be two apertures, the one of entrance and the other of exit; but it sometimes happens that the bullet lodges and does not pass out. The edges of the aperture of entrance are generally torn and lacerated, and appear blackened, as if they had been burnt: this arises from the heat and flame of the gunpowder at the moment of explosion. The skin is often ecchymosed, and is much discoloured by the powder; the clothes covering the body are blackened by the discharge, and sometimes ignited by the flame. If the muzzle of the piece was not in immediate contact with the part struck, the wound is rounded; but if there has been direct contact, the skin, besides being burnt, is torn and much lacerated. The bleeding is usually slight, and, when it occurs, it is more commonly observed from the orifice of exit than from that of entrance. It should be remarked that the aperture of entrance is round only when the bullet strikes point-blank or nearly so. If it should strike obliquely, the orifice will have more or less of an oval or valvular form; and by an observation of this kind we may sometimes determine the relative position of the assailant with respect to a wounded person. Supposing the bullet to have been fired from a moderate distance, but so neat as to have had sufficient momentum to traverse the body, then the appearance of the wound will be different: the orifice of entrance will be well defined, round or oval, according to the circumstances; the skin slightly depressed, the edges presenting a faintly bruised appearance, ' but the surrounding parts are neither blackened nor burnt, and they do not present any marks of bleeding. In these cases, the orifice of exit is [ large, irregular, the edges somewhat everted, and the skin lacerated, but free from any appearances of blackness or burning: it is generally three or four times as large as the entrance-aperture. The orifice of entrance is, however, usually large and irregular when a bullet strikes near the extremity of its range. The entrance-aperture may have the appearance of being smaller than the projectile, owing to the elasticity of the living skin. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1829, t. 2, p. 219.) It is the same with the aperture in the dress, when this is formed of an elastic material. According to pupuytren, the hole in the dress is always smaller than that made by a bullet in the skin. These points should be remembered. in


[384/872 b22652516_0384.jp2]

37'2 ENTRANCE AND EXIT APERTURES. fitting projectiles to wounds which they are supposed to have produced. In recent times, bullets of a novel kind have been employed, and the appearances presented by gunshot-wounds have differed accord- ingly. Busch has directed attention to this point. He found that a chassepot-bullet, shot from a short distance into the human body, made a simple aperture of entrance, but that its aperture of exit was larger than a fist, and that there was very extensive fissuring and fracturing of bone. Bullets of soft lead produced larger apertures of exit than those made with hard lead. There is no essential difference in the action of bullets on the living or dead body as to appearance and extent. The wounds are not more extensive in the living than in the dead. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1874, vol. i. p. 616.) The question whether a piece was fired near to, or at a distance from, the wounded person, may be of some importance either on a charge of homicide or of alleged suicide. Two persons may quarrel, one having a loaded weapon in his hand, which he may allege to have been accidentally discharged and to have killed the deceased. If the allegation be true, we ought to find on the body the marks of a near wound; if, however, its characters are such that it has obviously been produced from a distance, and therefore after the quarrel, medical proof of the fact might imply malice, and involve the accused in a charge of murder. The following case occurred in Ireland in 1834. A tithe-collector was tried for the murder of a man by shooting him. It appeared in evidence tliat the prisoner, while on duty, was attacked by the deceased and two of his sons, and he drew a pistol to intimidate them. He was dragged oft" his horse by these persons, and during the scuffle, it is supposed, the pistol was discharged accidentally, and inflicted on the deceased a wound, of which he died shortly afterwards. The sons of the deceased swore that the prisoner took a deliberate aim, and fired the pistol at their father when at some distance ; and a priest came forward to depose that such was the dying declaration of the deceased. From some doubt of the truth of this story, the body, which had been carelessly inspected in the first instance, was ordered to be disinterred. It was again examined by a surgeon, who was enabled to swear positively that the pistol must have been fired close to the body of the deceased, and not at a distance, since there were the marks of powder and burning on the wrist. Hence it clearly fol- lowed that the pistol had not been discharged at a distance, but during the scuffle, either by accident or in self-defence. The prisoner was acquitted, and the parties who had appeared as witnesses against him were convicted of perjury. It has been said that, when a bullet is fired close to the body, it commonly traverses it; and therefore it has been rather hastily assumed that, when there is only one external wound, and the bullet has lodged in the body, this is a proof that the piece has been fired from a distance. This inference is, however, erroneous. A bullet may be fired close to 'a person and yet not traverse the body, either from its impulsive force -not being sufficiently great, or from its meeting with great resistance j


[385/872 b22652516_0385.jp2]

WAS THE PIECE FIRED NEAR OR AT A DISTANCE? 373 in ite course. Many cases might be cited to show that, in the near wounds produced by suicides and murderers, the bullets have not always traversed the body. In suicide, when the piece is discharged into the mouth, the projectile often lodges in some part of the head {antej p. 371). It is not in the power of a witness to say, from the mere fact of a bullet lodging or traversing, whether the assassin was far oflf or near at the time that the deceased was wounded. The latter point may be sometimes readily determined by the marks of injury and burning about the skin and dress. When a gun or a pistol is dis- charged at a distance of three or four yards from the person, it will not, of course, produce those marks of blackening, burning, and bruising on the skin which are found when the muzzle is within a few inches of the body. A wound which does not present these appearances may remove the suspicion of suicide, and create a strong presumption of homicide. Lachese found (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1836, p. 368) that, in firing a gun at a distance of four feet, the skin was only partially blackened. It would be very important in a case of this kind to notice the direction of the wound, as well as the relative positions of the assailant and assailed, as stated by witnesses or deduced from circumstances. When a ball traverses the body, it sometimes happens that the two apertures are opposite to each other, although the ball may not have taken a rectilinear course between them, but have been variously deflected by the subjacent hard parts. This deflection of a ball from a rectflinear course is met with in those cases in which it happens to strike obliquely a curved surface, and it is found that, when the ball enters and does not pass out, its course is often circuitous, so that it is not always easy to surmise in what part of the body it will be found. A witness may be asked—When was the gunshot-wound inflicted? and how long did the wounded person survive after receiving it ? A gunshot-wound undergoes no obvious change for eight or ten hours after its infliction. Our judgment in reference to these questions may be assisted by observing the parts which are involved, although we cannot always infer, from the quantity of blood found near to a body, that the bleeding was an immediate consequence of the wound, or that the whole of the blood was effused at once. We cannot, then, always affirm that the deceased could not have moved or exerted himself in; some degree after receiving it. The exertion thus made subsequently to his being wounded may have actuallj'^ caused the fatal bleeding. Suicidal and Homicidal Gunshot-wounds.—When it is doubtful whether the wound was the result of suicide or homicide, the point may be sometimes determined by paying attention to its situation and direction. Suicidal gunshot-wounds are almost always directed to a vital part—to the heart or to the brain; they possess those characters "\vhich belong to wounds inflicted near to the body: the skin is dis- coloured or burnt, the wound wide and lacerated, the hand which dis- charged the weapon often blackened, and sometimes still grasping the pistol. The ball may or may not have traversed, as this will depend I on the momentum which it derived from the charge, and the resistance which it experienced.


[386/872 b22652516_0386.jp2]

SUICIDAL AND HOMICIDAL GUNSHOT-WOUNDS. 374 On the occasion of the trial for the Uxbridge murder {Reg. v. Gib- bons^ C. C. C, Dec. 1884), several important questions arose as to the suicidal or homicidal character of four gunshot-wounds found by Boulby on the body of the deceased. One of the bullets had penetrated the heart. The prisoner was convicted, (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1885, i, p. 62.) Accidental gunshot-wounds bear the characters of near wounds: they may touch vital parts, but, if the body has not been disturbed, the presence or absence of design in the infliction of a wound is com- monly made appaient by the relative position of the body and the weapon. They frequently arise from persons drawing the charges of guns or pistols with the muzzles pointed towards them, and they are then situated in front; at other times they are produced by persons pulling towards them through hedges, or dragging after them, loaded guns. In the latter case the wound is behind, and it may strongly resemble a homicidal wound, although the circumstances under which the body is found generally suffice to explain the matter. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1860, t. 1, p. 443.) A loaded gun had been placed on the top of a corn-bin in a stable. A fowl trod upon the trigger, and thus fired the gun. It seriously wounded an old man who was near. This shows by what a strange coincidence a man may be found shot with his own gun, and how difficult it might be to reconcile the discharge of the gun with any accidental circumstances. In suicide, there is commonly strong evidence of design; in accident, all evidence of design is wanting. Suicides sometimes make use of extraordinary weapons,; or use weapons in an extraordinary manner. ; Accidental gunshot-wounds sometimes simulate those which are the result of homicide. In 1884 a poacher whilst carrying a double- barrelled muzzle-loading gun in his pocket, hoisted the carcase of a roe, which his party had shot, on to his shoulder, when the sudden move- ment of the body caused the weapon, a barrel of which was loaded, to fall out of his pocket, and the loaded barrel went off, the shot lodging in the abdomen, causing his death in a few minutes. In 1887 a man was killed by his brother's gun, which was fired by a dog playing round the brother. The charge lodged in the left side, and the man died in an hour. In 1890, a man was carrying his gun in his pocket in two pieces, and as he was taking out the stock, the barrel also fell out, and striking on a stone went ofl". The charge entered the man's arm, shattering it, and he died of the injury thus inflicted. The above cases were reported to the editor by Mackintosh, who drew attention to the fact that poachers for convenience often separate the stock from the barrel of a gun, and carry both in their pockets in order to avoid' observation. On Jan. 18, 1881, the body of a lawyer, named Bernays, was found in a chair, in a sitting posture, in a house into which he had been inveigled eleven days previously. There were two pistol-shot wounds —one in the right temple, of a simple character; the other, and fatal wound, was in the nape of the neck. The latter was a perfectly clean wound, without any singeing. The ball had gone through the neck


[387/872 b22652516_0387.jp2]

WOUNDS FROM SMALL-SHOT. 375 from left to right, slightly ascending, and had perforated the skull, j There were blood-stains on the nape of the neck, and on the right side I of the head. The bleeding from the fatal wound was internal, and there was little blood on the clothes. There was a small pool of blood I on the carpet; and on this, it is alleged, was the impress of a foot. |i This must have been made after the blood had stififened. It was I endeavoured to be shown, however, by the defence, that the footprint I might have been made not more than ten or fifteen minutes after the effusion of blood had taken place. The prisoner, Leon Peltzer, W£S convicted, and admitted the justice of the conviction. When, however, experts differ, as in this case, as to whether a mark on a pool of blood weighing nine ounces has been produced by a boot or by a trouser- covered knee, the evidence ought to be rejected. (See 'Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1883, i. p. 23.) Position of the Wounded Person when shot.—Did the deceased receive the shot while standing, falling, or lying down ? Was the piece, when discharged, pointed from the shoulder ? These questions can only be answered by reference to the particular circumstances of the case. In general, when a person is shot while standing, and the piece is pointed from the shoulder, the wound is more or less transverse; but due allowance must be made for the deflection of balls after penetration. Was the deceased shot while running away, or when approaching the person who fired ? This question is answered by observing, in the case I of a traversing wound, in which alone any difficulty can arise, whether the entrance-orifice be situated in front or behind. Wounds from Small-shot.—Death is sometimes occasioned by small- shot; and here several medico-legal questions present themselves. Small-shot may act in two ways: (1) it either strikes without spread- I ing, in which case the discharge is always near the person shot, and its i action is much more dangerous than that of a single ball, because it produces extensive lacerations; or (2) it strikes after it has spread, and here the discharge must have been distant, and comparatively little mischief is done. Lachese ascertained, by many experiments on dead bodies, that in order to produce, with small-shot, a round opening some- what resembling that produced by a bullet, the discharge should take place point-blank at the distance of about ten or twelve inches from the surface of the body. When the distance was from twelve to I) eighteen inches, the opening made was irregular, and the borders were much lacerated; at thirty-six inches, the one central opening was entirely ; lost, and the surface of the body was covered with shot-marks. The 1 effect after this was found to depend on the distance, the kind of gun, and the strength of the charge ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1836, p. 386); but the shot is, in general, much scattered over the surface of the body. From these results we may form an opinion of the distance at which the piece was fired. It is difiScult to conceive that small-shot can, under any circum- stances, produce a single entrance-wound having some appearance of I circularity about it, without at the same time singeing or burning the jSkin or dress. The difficulty of laying down any general rules respect-


[388/872 b22652516_0388.jp2]

WOUNDS FROM WADDING AND GUNPOWDER. 376 ing the wounds produced by small-shot at their entrance and exit will be apparent from the following facts. A boy was shot in the neck by the accidental discharge of his gun, loaded with an ounce of No. 8 shot. He died instantly. He was leaning forwards on the muzzle, so that it was nearly in contact with the skin of the neck. A large round hole was produced, one inch and a half in diameter, the edges of which were slightly blackened with powder. The exit-aperture, which was at the back of the neck a little to the left of the third cervical vertebra, was a mere slit in the skin, scarcely an inch long, with the long dia- meter placed vertically. The smallness of this aperture may have been owing to the greater part of the charge being lodged in the body. The entrance-aperture, although rounded, was too large to be mistaken for a bullet-wound; it was evidently a near wound, from the blackening of the edges. On the other hand, Lowe found that a round aperture might be produced by a discharge of small-shot at a much greater distance from the object than that assigned by Lachese. Admitting such exceptional instances, and assuming the general correctness of the inferences drawn by Lachese from the results of his experiments in discharging small-shot at dead bodies placed at different distances, it does not seem probable that a wound from small-shot can, under any circumstances, be mistaken for one produced by a leaden hullet. A discharge of smaD-sliot, in contact with the skin or close to it, will, however, produce, not a round opening, but a severe lacerated wound. Small-shot is rarely observed to traverse the body entirely, unless discharged so near as to make a clean round opening; but a single pellet reaching the body may destroy life. There may be no exit- aperture, or it may be smaller than that of entrance. Such minute wounds might be easily overlooked in the examination of a dead body. Small-shot, even when wounding only the skin of the back superficially, has been known to cause death by tetanus. Wounds from Wadding and Gunpowder.—It matters not with what the piece is charged, it is capable, when fired near, of producing a wound which may prove fatal. Thus a gun loaded with wadding, or even with gunpowder only, may cause death. In these cases, an im- pulsive force is given by the explosion, and the substance becomes a dangerous projectile. The lighter the projectile, the shorter the dis- tance to which it is carried; but when discharged near to the body, it may produce a fatal penetrating wound. A portion of the dress may be carried into the wound, and lead to death from bleeding ; or, if the wounded person recover from the first effects, he may subsequently sink under an attack of tetanus or erysipelas. It is unfortunate that so much ignorance prevails on this point; for fatal accidents frequently occur from persons discharging guns at others in sport—an act which they think they may perform without danger, because they are not loaded with ball or shot. It has been observed that persons, in attempting to commit suicide, have occasionally forgotten to put a bullet into the pistol; nevertheless, the discharge of the weapon into the mouth has sufficed, from the effect of the wadding only, to produce a considerable destruction of


[389/872 b22652516_0389.jp2]

377 WOUNDS FROM WADDING AND GUNPOWDER. parts, and to cause a serious loss of blood. Fatal accidents have frequently taken place from the discharge of wadding from cannon during reviews. It is not easy to say at what distance a weapon thus charged with wadding and powder would cease to produce mischief, since this must depend on the impulsive force given by the powder, and on the size of the piece. Lachese ascertained that a piece charged with gunpowder is capable of producing a penetrating wound somewhat resembling that caused by small-shot, when the piece is large, strongly charged, and fired within six inches of the surface of the body. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1836, p. 368.) This arises from a portion of the powder always escaping combustion at the time of discharge, and each grain then acts hke a pellet of small-shot. Under any circumstances, a dis- charge of powder only, contuses the skin, producing ecchymosis, and often lacerating it, if the piece be fired near. The dress is burnt and the skin scorched from the globe of flame formed by the combustion of the powder; and many particles of gunpowder may be actually driven into the true skin. All the substances here spoken of are considered to be projectiles; and the weapons are held in law to be loaded arms, so long as they are capable of producing bodily injury at the distance from which the piece containing them is discharged. It may, therefore, become a question as to the distance at which these light projectiles cease to be harmless. The answer must be governed by circumstances; but it will in all cases materially depend on the strength of the charge. Swift performed some experiments with a pistol loaded with gunpowder and luadding, in order to determine the effect of a discharge at different distances. At twelve inches' distance from a dead body, he found that the clothes were lacerated and the skin abraded, but the wadding did not penetrate; at six inches, the clothes were lacerated, and the wad- ding penetrated to the depth of half an inch; at two inches, the wound produced, which was two inches deep, was ragged and blackened; at an inch and a half from the chest, the wadding passed into the cavity between the ribs, and in a second experiment it carried away a portion of a rib. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xl. p. 734.) This subject was investigated by Mackintosh, and he forwarded to the author the results of his experiments. As a summary, he found, in reference to the wounds produced by wadding, that the amount of I injur}'' done is in proportion to the amount of powder in the gun, the hardness and compactness of the wadding or substance used in place of shot or bullet, and the distance of the object from the point of firing. A case occurred in his practice which was the subject of a trial for unlawful wounding. {Heg. v. Isgate, Norwich Aut. Ass., 1867.) The prisoner fired at a boy with a gun loaded with pieces of brown paper pressed together. He was then at a distance of two or three yards from the boy. There was a wound in the chest about the size of a shilling. The margin of the wound was jagged, had a blueish-black or mottled appearance, and the edges of one of the ribs were laid bare. The pellet took a course downwards, as a result of its deflection by the rib. A quantity of brown paper was removed from the wound, and the boy ultimately recovered. The question which Mackintosh pro-


[390/872 b22652516_0390.jp2]

378 EXAMINATION OF FIREARMS. posed to consider was whether paper-wadding could really produce such a wound as was here found, when the gun was fired from a dis- tance of two or three yards. Without going into details, it may be stated that, when the gun was charged with a small quantity of powder and brown-paper wadding, there was indentation, but no penetration at a distance of two yards. With one-third more powder, and a closely compressed brown-paper pellet, there was penetration through the boy's jacket to an inch and a half beyond. These facts bear out the conclusion already given, and confirmed the boy's account of the dis- tance from which the gun was fired at him by the prisoner. Swift had inferred from his experiments that a penetrating wound from wadding was not produced unless the piece was discharged within a distance of six inches; but Mackintosh's results clearly show that this must depend on the quantity of powder used, and the loose or con- densed nature of the substance employed as a projectile. Examination of Firearms.—An attempt has been made by French medical jurists to determine for how long a period a gun or pistol found near a dead body may have been discharged; but it is out of our power to lay down any precise rules on such a subject. All that we can say is that a quantity of sulphide of potassium, mixed with char- coal, is left adhering to the barrel of the piece, when recently discharged; and this is indicated by its forming a strongly alkaline solution with water, evolving an odour of sulphuretted hydrogen, and giving a deep- brown precipitate with a solution of acetate of lead. After some hours or days, according to the degree of exposure to air and moisture, the saline residue becomes converted into sulphate of potassium, forming a neutral solution with water, and giving a white precipitate with acetate of lead. If a considerable time has elapsed since the piece was discharged, oxide of iron, with traces of sulphate, may be found. (See * Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1834, p. 458; 1839, p. 197 ; 1842, p. 368.) When called to a case of gunshot-wound, either accidental or criminal, it is always proper to examine the piece, if found. Has it or has it not been recently discharged? may be a material question. This is best determined by a gunsmith. A trial took place on the Western Circuit, March, 1873, in which the fact was of great importance. The prisoner asserted that his gun had not been used for a long time. On examina- tion of the barrel, however, it was found to have been quite recently discharged. This at once connected him with the act of wounding of which he was accused. In an agrarian murder in Ireland, in 1876, there was found imbedded in the heart of the deceased the half of a common marble such as children use in play. A bag of marbles of the same size and kind was found in the house of one of the prisoners, and this discovery connected him with the act. The examination of wadding or paper found in a gunshot-wound, or near a dead body, has in more than one instance led to the detection of the person who had committed a crime. The handwriting has been traced on the paper used as wadding, or it has been found to have been part of a printed page, of which the remainder has been discovered in the possession of the accused. When a gun is discharged near to the


[391/872 b22652516_0391.jp2]

379 EXAMINATION OF FIREARMS AND BULLETS. body, a portion of the wadding is generally carried into the large irregular wound which is produced. This was part of the evidence in the case of Reg. v. Blagg (Chester Sum. Ass., 1857). The pecuhar character of the wadding found in the body connected the prisoner with the act. Whether the wadding is found in or near the body, it should be equally preserved. In lieg. v. Richardson (Lincoln Ass., Dec. 1860), the accused was convicted of murdering a policeman under the following circumstances. He shot at the deceased, who was able before death to identify the prisoner; but as the deceased was weak from loss of blood, and failing in consciousness at the time, there was some difficulty in relying upon the dying declaration, especially as no other person witnessed the act. Some paper-wadding had been picked up on the spot where the deceased fell; and a gun, which had one barrel loaded and one empty from a recent discharge, was found in the prisoner's house within twenty-four hours of the murder. The wadding in the loaded barrel consisted of a fragment of the Times newspaper of March 27, 1854, and the charred and sulphurous pieces of wadding picked up on the spot were proved by the publisher of that journal to have formed a portion of the same impression. The prisoner's counsel, in fact, could not deny that the act had been brought home to the instrument, if not to the agent, and, though the explana- tion of the crime remained obscure to the last, and the motive un- assignable, the aggregate evidence proved sufficient to convince the jury. Any projectiles found in a gunshot-wound should always be preserved for evidence. In the case of Rush, who was tried and con victed of the murder of Mr. Jermy by a remarkable train of circum- stantial evidence (Norwich Lent Ass., 1849), it was proved that the projectiles removed from the body of the deceased consisted of irregular pieces of lead (slugs). Similar masses were taken from the body of the son, who was killed at the same time. They were described by the medical witness as being angular, and quite unlike the shot used in killing game. This proved that the two acts of murder were com- mitted by the same person, or by this person acting in concert with others. The chemical analysis of a projectile may be occasionally necessary. A common bullet is formed entirely of lead. Cast bullets are com- monly found to have a void space in the interior when cut through the centre, owing to the exterior cooling more rapidly than the interior, and to the greater bulk of the metal when in a liquid state. In large bullets this cavity is frequently of the size of a barleycorn. Bullets obtained by compression have no such space, and are of greater specific gravity. Small-shot is composed of lead with a minute portion of arsenic (l-200th part). If the arsenic is in large proportion, the shot is lenticular; if absent, or in small proportion, pyriform (Ure). In the case of Rush, type-metal was found in the house. This consists of lead with one-fourth part of antimony. The slugs were found to con- sist chiefly of lead, and to contain no antimony. The type-metal was thus excluded.


[392/872 b22652516_0392.jp2]

38o BURNS AND SCALDS. CHAPTER 37. DEATH PROM BURNS AND SCALDS.—SYMPTOMS.—STUPOR.—CAUSE OF DEATH. —POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES.—BURNS ON THE DEAD BODY.—ACCIDENT, HOMICIDE, OR SUICIDE.—WOUNDS CAUSED BY FIRE.—SCALDING.—BURNS BY CORROSIVE LIQUIDS. Burns and Scalds.—A hum is an injury produced by the application of a heated soHd, or a flame, to the surface of the body; while a scald results from the application of a liquid at a high temperature under the same circumstances. There seems to be no real distinction between a burn and a scald in reference to the effects produced on the body: the injury resulting from boiling mercury or melted lead might take either appellation. Nevertheless, as a matter of medical evidence, it may be important to state whether the injury found on a body was caused by such a Hquid as boiling water or by a heated solid. K the former, the injury might be ascribed to accident; if the latter, to criminal design. A scald produced by boiling water would be indicated by a sodden state of the skin and flesh, but there would be no destruction of sub- stance. In a burn by a heated solid, the parts may be more or less destroyed or even charred; the cuticle may be found blackened, dry, almost of a horny consistency, and presenting a shrivelled appearance. This distinction, however, would only apply to scalds from water. A scald from melted lead (633° F.) could not be distinguished from a burn produced by a solid heated to the same temperature. Some of the oils boil at 500° F., and they produce, by contact with the skin, burns as severe as those caused by melted metal. Burns from flame, such as that of gas, are indicated by extensive scorching of the skin, while burns from gunpowder are known, not only by the scorching, but by the small particles of unburnt carbon which are imbedded in the skin. Neither a burn nor a scald appears to be considered as a wound- in law; but in the statute of wounding they are included among bodily- injuries dangerous to life. Burns and scalds may be regarded as dangerous in proportion to the extent of surface of skin which they cover, as well as the depth to which they extend. The extent of skin involved in a superficial burn, as a result of exposure to flame, is of greater importance than the entire destruction of a small part of the body through an intensely heated solid. When the burn is extensive, death may ensue either from the severity of the pain produced, or from a sympathetic shock to the nervous system. Death takes place rapidly from burns in children and nervous females; but in adults and old persons there is a better chance of recovery. In some instances, especially in children, stupor and insensibility supervene; and these symptoms have been soon followed by coma and death. If, under these circumstances, opium has been given to the patient as a sedative, the


[393/872 b22652516_0393.jp2]

CAUSE OF DEATH. POST-MORTEM APPEAEANCES. 381 stupor resulting from a burn may be attributed to the narcotic effects of the drug; and, should the person die, the practitioner may find himself involved in a charge of malapraxis or manslaughter. It may be alleged, as in the following case, that the person was poisoned with opium. A medical man was charged with the manslaughter of a child, by giving to it an overdose of opium while it was labouring under the effects of a severe scald. Abernethy stated in his evidence, which was given in favour of the practitioner, that he thought the use of opium was very proper; that the quantity given—eight drops of tincture of opium immediately after the accident, and ten drops two hours afterwards—was not an overdose for a child (the age is not stated). The circumstance of the child continuing to sleep until it died, after taking the opium, was, in his judgment, no proof that it had been poisoned. The sleep was nothing more than the torpor into which it had been plunged by the accident. The surgeon was acquitted. Notwithstanding the very favourable opinion expressed by Abernethy of this plan of treatment, it would be advisable to avoid the use of opium on these occasions in treating infants and children. Life is readily destroyed in young sub- jects by the smallest doses of this drug; and there are no satisfactory means of distinguishing the comatose symptoms produced by a burn or a scald from those produced by an overdose of opium (p. 164). Cause of Death.—In some instances, especially in children, stupor and insensibility have rapidly supervened; and these symptoms have been followed by coma and death. Of the cause of death in persons exposed to fire, little need be said. In large conflagrations persons are frequently simply suffocated, from the want of a proper amount of air or from breathing the products of combustion—carbonic acid or carbonic oxide. The former darkens the blood and muscles; the latter renders them lighter in colour. In other cases, where a large volume of flame suddenly strikes the body and the person is still able to breathe, the fatal effect may be due to shock—a sudden and violent impression on the nervous system through the skin. A person may recover from the first effects of severe burns, but ultimately sink from exhaustion or from an attack of tetanus. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1854, i. p. 406; see 'Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1873, t. 1, p. 232.) The annual deaths from burns and scalds are numerous. According to the returns of the Registrar-General, from 2000 to 3000 deaths per year occur from this cause. Post-mortem Appearances.—In examining the body of a person found burnt, all matters connected with sex and identity should be first duly observed. Griinbaum has reported a case in which he was required to .examine certain carbonized remains, in which, in spite of the destruc- tion of the sexual organs, he was able to determine the sex. (Horn's ' Vierteljahrsschr.,' Oct. 1864.) When a body has been entirely con- sumed by fire, the presence of a large quantity of phosphate of calcium in the ashes would indicate animal remains. The bones are never com- pletely destroyed; they become white, and the mineral portions of them retain their form even after the action of a most intense fire. "When death has been caused by severe pain, no changes have been


[394/872 b22652516_0394.jp2]

382 BURNS ON THE LIVING AND DEAD BODY. detected in the dead body; but, in some fatal cases, it has been found on inspection that there were patches of redness on the bronchial mucous membrane, as well as in the stomach and intestines. The brain has been found gorged, and the ventricles have contained an abundance of serum. The serous liquids of the pericardium and pleura have also been in larger quantity than natural. In short, besides congestion, there is generally abundant serous effusion in one of the three great cavities, especially in the head. This arises from the sudden reflux of blood into the interior, as an effect of the local injury. In deaths from fires in houses, the persons are usually suffo- cated, and then there are the appearances of this kind of death. (See Suffocation, post.) In a case in which a woman died on the thirteenth day, from a superficial burn involving the skin of the lower part of her body, the stomach was found inflamed at its greater extremity, and the duodenum at its lower portion, the mucous folds of the intestines having a scarlet colour. The other intestines as far as the caecum were also more or less inflamed. (' Amer. Jour. Med. Sci.,' 1861, p. 137.) If the person survive the first effects, he may die from inflammation, suppuration, gangrene, irritation, or fever, or he may be worn out by exhaustion. Schjerning has collected the records of a large number of post-mortem examinations in deaths from burns and scalds. (' Viertel- jahrsschr. fur Gerichtl. Med.,' 1884, xH. pp. 24, 273.) Did the Burning of the Body take place hefore or after Death f Vesication.—The production of vesication or of blisters containing serum is commonly regarded as an essential character of a "burn which has been produced during life, but it is not a necessary or invariable effect of a burn on the living body. Vesication is especially observed in scalds, or in those cases in which the skin has been burnt by flame or by the ignition of the clothes, provided the cuticle has not been destroyed. It is not so commonly observed in burns produced by intensely heated solids. In vesication, the cuticle is raised from the true skin beneath, and is converted into one or more blisters contain- ing serum or a serous liquid, while the skin around is of a deep-red colour. It is uncertain as to the time at which it appears ; it may be produced in a few minutes, or sometimes not for several hours; hence death may take place before vesication occurs, and the non-discovery of this condition does not warrant the opinion that the burn could not have taken place during life. If the cuticle is removed from a vesi- cated part of the living body, the skin beneath will become intensely reddened; but if the cuticle is stripped off a dead body, the skin will become hard, dry, and of a horny-yellow colour,—it does not acquire the intense scarlet injection which is acquired by the living skin when vesicated and the surface is exposed. In cases in which persons, while living, have suffered from general dropsy, it has been found, on the application of heat to their bodies after death, that blisters containing serum or a serous liquid have been formed; hence, in drawing a conclusion from the examination of burns on the body of a person affected with general dropsy, it is necessary to be cautious. In such cases it would not be possible, from the mere


[395/872 b22652516_0395.jp2]

BURNS ON THE LIVING AND DEAD BODY. resence of serous blisters, to say whether the burn was produced efore or after death. Wright found, in his experiments on the dead body, that if a sufficient heat were closely applied to the skin within half an hour or longer after death, blisters containing serum were sooner or later produced. In short, as long as the body was warm and the joints were flexible, the effects of fire were similar to those observed on the living. Other experimenters have found that blisters were produced, but that they did not contain serum. The result no doubt depends on the time after death at which the experiment is performed. The body of a drowned man, within a few minutes after the acci- dent, was removed from the water and placed in a hot bath. It was found impossible to resuscitate him, but, owing to the great heat of the water, portions of the cuticle came off when the body was removed. On inspection, there were several vesications filled with bloody serum over a considerable portion of the skin, especially of the extre- mities. There was no anasarca (dropsy) here to account for the production of the blisters. In this case the man was pulseless, and to all appear- ance dead^ when placed in the hot bath ; hence the effects of hot water on the living and recently dead body, so far as the production of serous blisters is concerned, are similar. Chambert has published the results of numerous experiments on the effects of burns on the living and dead body. These have been made on the bodies of persons, from the moment of death until twenty hours after dissolution, and some were performed before death. The general results of his researches are that vesications, or blisters, may be produced by burns both on the living and dead body; that they are produced at a lower temperature in the living than in the dead; that in the hving a burn produces great capillary congestion, with the effusion of serum in the blisters; and that this serum when heated, or treated with nitric acid, sets into a nearly solid coagulum. The blisters produced in a dead body, even a few minutes after death, contain a thin watery serum, which is only rendered opaline or milky by heat and the action of nitric acid. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1859, t. 1, p. 342.) When a body is cold and rigid, bUsters containing air or vapour alone are produced. Bouchut found that, by the application of heat, he could produce vesicles containing a watery serum, sometimes bloody, within twelve, eighteen, and twenty- four hours after death. (' Gaz. Med.,' March, 1847; and ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1878, i. p. 509.) In burns, especially in those produced by red-hot solids, other effects besides vesication follow. The edge of the skin immediately around the part burnt is commonly of a dead white, and close to this is a deep- red line, gradually shaded off into the surrounding skin, which is reddened. The diffused redness is removable by pressure, and dis- appears with life; the red line here referred to, however, is not re- movable by pressure, and is persistent after death. This line of redness is not always met with in severe burns, and when a person survives one or two days, its production appears to depend upon a power of reaction in the system. Thus, then, its absence furnishes no proof of the burn having been produced after death, for it is not a necessary


[396/872 b22652516_0396.jp2]

BURNS. CHANGES IN THE SKIN. 384 accompaniment of a bum during life. Wright considered that in a low state of vitality a hne of redness might not be produced by a severe burn on the living body, and that more certain reliance may be placed on the red marks found beneath the blisters and crusts of vital burns. These latter were well marked when he found the line of redness itself indistinct. (' On Vital and Post-mortem Burning,' p. 25.) The researches of Chambert confirm this view. In a burn on a living person, if the skin has not been entirely charred and destroyed, the cutis will present a dotted or pointed redness—these dots or points corresponding to the sudiparous (perspiratory) and hair follicles. After complete death, a burn does not produce any such effect—the cutis is of a dead whiteness on the surface and in its substance. In one experiment performed, ten minutes after death, there was no redness of the skin, either beneath the blisters or in the surrounding parts. Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1859, t. 1, p. 368.) This reddened or congested state of the bare skin is more constant than any other appearance, and forms the best criterion of the infliction of a burn on the living body. The conclusions that we may draw from the foregoing statements are : 1. That, as a general rule, when we discover blisters with effusion of serum, or a Hne of redness, or both, and a reddened or congested state of the skin, about a burnt part of the body, we are justified in saying that the burn has occurred during life. 2. That from the absence of these appearances, it does not necessarily follow that the burn has not been produced on the hving body. When several hums are found on a dead body, it may be a question whether they were all produced at the same time. This is a point which can be determined only by observing whether any of them present signs of gangrenous separation, of suppuration, granulation, or other changes that take place in a living body after accidents of this kind. The witness may be asked—How long did the deceased survive the burn ? A person may die in a few minutes or live some hours after receiving a most extensive burn; and yet there will be no change in the part burnt, to indicate when death actually took place. There may have been no time for inflammation or its consequences to become established. Suppuration generally follows vesication, and in severe cases it may occur on the second or third day; but often not until a later period. In regard to gangrene, this takes place when the vitality of a burnt part is destroyed. The time of its occurrence is uncertain, but it sometimes very speedily follows the accident. The subject of scalding or hoillnff scarcely requires a separate notice. A scald from boiling water would, when recent, be indicated by the production of serous blisters, or a sodden state of the skin, which appears white and soft. The living structures are not charred or de- stroyed as by the application of a red-hot solid. In a remarkable case of alleged child-murder {Reg. v. Go'odfellow, Winchester Wint. Ass., 1876), the body of the child was found in a saucepan covered over, and it was evident from its appearance that it had been thoroughly boiled. The main question was—Had the child been put living or dead into .the water? The prisoner admitted that the child had Ijreathed once,


[397/872 b22652516_0397.jp2]

ACCIDENT, HOMICIDE, OR SUICIDE. 385 and that she had then placed the body where it was found. According to one medical witness, all the organs were healthy, but the action of boiling water upon the body had so destroyed the means of testing the lungs, that it was difficult to say whether the child had breathed or not. He was of opinion that the child was dead when put into the saucepan. Another physician, relying upon the presence on the body of blisters containing a yellow serum, believed that the child was alive when its body was put into the water. The judge thought this to be too doubtful a point to rely upon in the absence of evidence from the lungs. The woman was acquitted of murder, but found guilty of concealment of birth. Accident, Homicide, or Suicide.—It is rare that murder is perpetrated by burning: the dead body is either burnt for the purpose of entirely destroying it, or the clothes are fired soon after a person has been killed, in order to conceal wounds or other violent means of death, and to make it appear as if the deceased had been accidentally destroyed by fire. {Reg. v. Lee, Exeter Ass., Jan. 1885.) Death by burning is either the result of accident or homicide, most commonly the former; but medical evidence may give rise to a suspicion of murder under two conditions: 1. When it is evident that several parts of the body or clothing have been fired at the same time, and the burns are such as not readily to be explained by the same accident or by the acci- dental ignition of the clothes. 2. When there are marks of homicidal violence on the body; but these marks, if we except fractures of the bones, may be easily effaced when the burn is extensive. Time required for the Burning of a Dead Body.—It may be a medico- legal question whether, on discovering a body much burnt, it could be determined from its appearance how long a period it would require to produce the amount of destruction observed. Such a question may arise when it is intended to connect a person with the perpetration of an alleged crime, but it does not admit of a precise answer. A conjec- ture only can be formed from the facts proved in each particular case. The human body contains a large proportion of water (72 per cent.); this gives to the soft structures a power of resisting combustion. At the same time, there is a quantity of fat in the body, varying in different parts, but amounting to an average of about five per cent. The fat or oil tends to increase its combustibilit}', and this is still further increased if the body is placed on any combustible article which can imbibe the oil, such as a rug or a deal floor. The nature of the dress will also make a difference. Under a strong and active flame, which might subsequently burn out before the discovery of the body, there would be a degree of destruction .in half an hour which a more slow and smothered combustion would not effect in several hours. On the trial of Pel for the murder of his mistress, Bohmer (Paris, June, 1885), experiments were made at the Morgue with the view of ascertaining within what period a body could be cremated, with- out nuisance, in an ordinary stove. It was found that a body weighing 132 pounds could be satisfactorily disposed of in 40 hours. It is from a want of due consideration of the facts relatinj; to the 2 c


[398/872 b22652516_0398.jp2]

ALLEGED SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION. 386 burning of the body that some of the older medico-legal writers have given support to the hypothesis of spontaneous combustion. It has been supposed that in certain cases the dead human body has been destroyed more than appeared consistent with the fact of ordinary combustion from articles of dress or furniture ; but this opinion has arisen from a want of sufficient experience on the effects of heat. Then, as the means by which the dress of a person had become ignited were generally destroyed with the body, it was thought that a human being might, under certain conditions, be consumed by fire spontaneously generated within him. This extravagant hypothesis has, however, found advocates in modern times. In March, 1850, a man named Stauff was tried at Darmstadt for the murder of the Countess of Ooerlitz. He had assaulted the deceased in her chamber, and then set fire to the furniture with a view to conceal his crime. The body and dress were partially consumed. As the means by which the fire was applied were not at once apparent, and the assassin had locked the doors of the room, some medical men took up the theory that the deceased had died from spontaneous combustion. The facts of the case were referred to Liebig and Bischoff", and their report was issued in March, 1850, at which date the man Stauff" was put on his trial. They found no difficulty in concluding that a murder had been perpetrated, and the bodv wilfully burnt after death for the purpose of concealing the crime. There was some doubt whether the deceased had died from strangulation, or from violence to the head. Stauff" was convicted, chiefly on circumstantial evidence. He subsequently confessed that the countess had entered her room as he was in the act of committing a robbery. A struggle took place; he seized her by the throat, strangled her, and afterwards placed the body in a chair, pihng around it combustible articles of furniture. He set fire to these, with a view of destroymg the proofs of his crime. It was observed that the tongue of the deceased was protruded, as it is in violent strangulation, and that in its charred state it retained the position given to it by the act of murder. Other instances of alleged spontaneous combustion, if properly investigated, would have turned out to be cases of accidental or homicidal burning. (See Ogston's 'Lect. on Med. Jurispr., pp. 463, 558.) Spontaneous combustion may take place in some kinds of vegetable and mineral substances, but not in the animal body, living or dead. Amongst the questions which arise in reference to a body found dead from hums is this—whether the burns have been caused by gas, or by inflammable vapours such as petroleum, or by gunpowder. Petro- leum is at once indicated by its pecuHar and powerful odour, and the sooty blackening of the parts burnt. {Reg. v. Lee, Exeter Ass., Jan. 1885.) In Ueg. v. Oaitslcell (Carlisle Spring Ass., 1872), the prisoner was convicted of manslaughter under the following circumstances. He poured a quantity of petroleum over the clothes of the deceased, and by accident the vapour caught fire, and the burns produced caused the man's death on the following day. Burns from petroleum, paraffin, kerosene, or any form of rock-oil, are generally of a severe kind. The


[399/872 b22652516_0399.jp2]

BURNS BY COREOSIVE LIQUIDS. 387 clothes of a person readily imbibe the liquid, and by their fibrous struc- ture act as a wick for spreading the combustion. There have been several cases in which men have been convicted of the murder of their wives by throwing at them a lamp in which petroleum was burning. The ignition of the dress has led to rapid death. Burns from the flame of gunpowder are generally characterized by blackening of the skin, and the introduction of some of the grains into the substance of the skin, producing the eflects of tattooing. Corrosive Liquids.—Among the cases in which medical evidence is sometimes required are those of throwing mineral acids, alkahes, or other corrosive liquids on the person. This crime was, and is, preva- lent ; and, until an alteration was made in the criminal law, there was no adequate punishment for it (24 and 25 Vict., c. 100, s. 29). On one occasion, an assailant escaped a charge of felony, because it could not be considered, in law, that sulphuric acid was capable of producing a wound. The statute above mentioned, while it punishes the offence, omits all reference to a definition of the word ' wound.' The nature of the liquid thrown is merely defined in general terms, to be ' any cor- rosive fluid or any destructive substance'—a point wlaich will require medical evidence for its elucidation. In common language, and according to the statute, the injury thus produced by a mineral acid, such as oil of vitriol, is called a burn, but it is wholly different in its origin as well as in its progress. Such an injury has, perhaps, never directly destroyed life; but great deformity and actual blindness have resulted. A medical man is sometimes required to distinguish these injuries from burns and scalds; this may be easily done, in the first instance, by the appearance of the part injured, as well as by the description of the first symptoms. The stain is brown when sulphuric acid has been used, and yellow when nitric or hydrochloric acid has been employed. The eschar, or destroyed, part is soft, and not dry as in a burn from a heated solid. The skin touched by a concentrated acid is destroyed, and sloughs away to the extent of the part on which the corrosive liquid was applied, leaving a suppu- rating and granulating surface. There is no capillary congestion or redness of the skin around the injury, as in a burn; but the colour of the injured part may throw some light upon the nature of the corrosive substance used. Articles of dress are also differently coloured by the various acids. The period at which a person may recover from an injury of this kind depends on its degree and extent, as well as on the part affected by the corrosive hquid. Although a person may not die from the direct effects of the acid, yet in irritable constitutions the inflammation which follows in deep-seated parts may prove fatal. In infants, or delicate nervous females, an extensive injury thus produced may readily destroy fife. In one instance, sulphuric acid thrown on the face produced inflammation of the eye, for which bleeding was prescribed. The person died of phlebitis (inflammation of the vein), as the result of this bleeding. The nature of the acid may be determined by applying wetted linen to the part, when the injury is recent, and examining the liquid thus


[400/872 b22652516_0400.jp2]

388 THROWING CORROSIVE LIQUIDS. absorbed. In general, however, evidence is readily obtained by ex- amining the spots or stains left on articles of clothing or furniture. Oil of vitriol is most commonly used. In one remarkable case {Reg. v. Lipshi, C. C. C, July, 1888) the editor found that the cotton night-dress of a woman whose life was taken by pouring a mixture of sulphuric and nitric acids down the throat, as well as the deal floor on which the acids were spilled, were partially converted into nitro-cellulose, which partially exploded when ignited in a closed tube. The caustic alkalies may be used under these circumstances, as well as numerous other liquids, on which the only medical opinion required would be, whether the article employed should or should not be considered as a 'corrosive' liquid or a ' destructive' substance. To constitute a felony, it is not now necessary that the person should have sustained any bodily injury from the act of throwing the corrosive hquid. Unless vital reaction has taken place, there are no means of distinguishing the effects of a corrosive liquid on the living from those produced on the dead body. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1859, t. 1, p. 396.) The mineral acids are sometimes used in other ways for the destruc- tion of life. A man poured a quantity of strong nitric acid into the ear of his wife while she was lying asleep. She awoke suddenly with a violent pain in the ear, which continued for three days, whereupon she became weak and exhausted. Soon afterwards there was copious bleeding, and a portion of membrane escaped. She lost the use of her right arm, and became completely deaf. Suppuration took place from the ear, and blood escaped daily. She gradually sank, and died six weeks after the injury, the right half of the body being convulsed before death. On inspection, a portion of the external ear was wanting, and the ear-passage was much wider than natural. The brain, near the petrous portion of the temporal bone, was softened, and the bone itself diseased (carious). The injury had led to death indirectly by producing disease of the brain. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xvii. p. 897.) In a case tried at Aberdeen, the evidence proved that a woman had poured oil of vitriol down the throat of her husband while he was lying asleep with his mouth open. She was convicted of the murder. In another case, a woman killed her husband by pouring a solution of corrosive sublimate down his throat while he was sleeping. These, however, were treated as cases of poisoning, as death did not depend on the local or external mischief produced by the corrosive agent employed.


[401/872 b22652516_0401.jp2]

ASPHYXIA. DROWNING. ASPHYXIA. DKOWNING. CHAPTER 38, CATJSE OF DEATH.—SECONDARY CAUSES.—POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES.— MEDICAL PROOFS OF DEATH FROM DROWNING.—SPECIFIC GRAVITY OF THE BODY.—COINCIDENTAL CAUSES OF DEATH.—MARKS OF VIOLENCE. ACCIDENTAL FRACTURES.—HOMICIDAL AND SUICIDAL DROWNING. Under the term Asphyxia is included those forms of violent death in which the act of respiration is primarily arrested (p. 36). This com- prises death from drowning, hanging, strangulation, and suffocation, and in this section the fatal effects of lightning, cold, and starvation will be considered. Apncea is a term sometimes improperly applied for asphyxia. The subject of asphyxia and the appearances presented by the body in this mode of death, have been fully considered at p. 36. Drowning. Cause of Death. Asphyxia.—In drowning, asphxyia is produced by a physical impediment to the introduction of air into the lungs. The medium in which the person is immersed acts mechani- cally, and even more effectually than a rope or hgature round the neck; for, although air escapes from the lungs, and water penetrates into the minute air-tubes, yet no air can enter to supply the place of that which has already expended its oxygen on the blood. Hence this fluid must circulate, in the first few minutes after submersion, in a state unfitted for the support of life (unaerated); but the person lives, and is sus- ceptible of recovery within a short interval. After the entire suspen- sion of respiration, the action of the heart gradually slackens, and finally stops. It is at this period of the arrest of circulation that asphyxia passes into death. Asphyxia is determined by the period at which respiration is completely arrested; but the point of time at which death from drowning occurs is fixed by the moment at which the action of the heart ceases. This varies considerably, according to age, sex, state of health, and other circumstances. When a person falls into water, and retains his consciousness, violent attempts are made to breathe: at each time that he rises to the surface a portion of air is received into the lungs, but, owing to the paouth being oh a level with the liquid, water also enters and passes


[402/872 b22652516_0402.jp2]

390 DEATH FROM DROWNING. into the throat. A quantity of water thus usually enters the mouth, which the drowning person is irresistibly compelled to swallow. In his efforts to breathe while his head is below water, a portion of this liquid is drawn into the air-tubes and cells of the lungs. The struggle for life may continue for a longer or shorter period, according to the age, sex, and strength of the person; but the result is that the blood in the lungs is imperfectly aerated, the person becomes exhausted, and insensibility follows. The mouth then sinks altogether below the level of the water—air can no longer enter into the lungs ; a portion of that which they contain is expelled, and rises in bubbles to the surface; an indescribable feeling of delirium, with a ringing sensation in the ears, supervenes; the person loses all consciousness, and sinks asphyxiated. In the state of asphyxia, while the dark-coloured blood is circulated, convulsive movements of the body take place, and the contents of the stomach are sometimes ejected by vomiting. There does not appear to be any sensation of pain, and, as in other cases of asphyxia, if the person recovers, there is a total unconsciousness of suffering during the period when the access of air was cut off from the lungs. The sensations of the drowned are stated to be by no means so acute as has commonly been supposed. A child thrown into the water by a nurse stated that she was conscious of sinking through the water till she felt her feet touch the bottom, and that she then fell asleep till she found herself rescued. (Case of Reg. v. Bedstone, C. C. C, Feb. 1885; 'Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1885, i. p. 341.) One of the editor's colleagues at Guy's Hospital, who was drowned to the stage of insensibility, describes his sensations as having been by no means so fearful as might have been expected. The successive phenomena of drowning have been divided into three stages by Bergeron and Montano. Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1877, t. 48, p. 332.) These authorities also state that the presence of a froth in the pharynx, larynx, and bronchial tubes is an invariable concomitant of death from drowning; that there is always a certain amount of congestion of the lungs, and sometimes this is accompanied by sub-pleural ecchymosis; and that the extent of the congestion and of the ecchymosis is always proportional to the efforts made at self-preservation. Some persons who fall into water are observed to sink at once, without making any attempt to extricate themselves. This may arise either from sudden syncope, or from the stunning produced by the fall. Should the person be intoxicated, or otherwise incapacitated, as by striking his head in falling, he may not again rise. These different conditions under which death may take place will sufficiently account for the difference in the appearances met with in the bodies of those who have died in water. A fatal result may be accelerated by the impression suddenly produced upon the skin, from the difference of temperature between the body and the water. To those who are not accustomed to water, a sudden immersion produces a great and rapid cooling of the surface, and forces the blood into the internal organs. There is difficulty of breathing, or severe spasmodic respiration, with giddiness and other symptoms, which may render a person powerless


[403/872 b22652516_0403.jp2]

EFFECTS OF SUBMERSION. to extricate himself. The effect of cold on the skin is seen in the contracted state of the cutis in the bodies of those who have been drowned during the winter. It is calculated that in 25 per cent, of all who are drowned, the cause of death is pure asphyxia, and that in the remainder, syncope and cerebral congestion, amounting to apoplexy, may have a share in causing death. In regard to the time required for death to take place by drowning, it may be observed that, when the mouth is so covered by water that air cannot enter, asphyxia comes on in the course of one or two minutes at the furthest, and the time at which this occurs does not appear to vary materially. Complete insensibility has supervened after one minute's submersion, and it is probable that in most cases a few seconds would suffice for the commencement of asphyxia. In this state a person can make no efforts to save himself, and death commonly ensues in from two to five minutes. The power of restoring life depends, not merely on the time that the body may have been submerged, but on the condition of the lungs at the time of its removal from the water. Experiments performed by a Committee of the Medico-Chirurgical Society have clearly proved that, as a form of asphyxia, drowning is not only more speedily fatal to hfe than ordinary suffocation, but, from the physical changes produced in the lungs by water the chances of recovery are lessened. The committee found that the difference in the results was not owing to exhaustion from struggling, from the violent efforts made to breathe, nor from the effect of cold in immersing the whole of the body, but to the introduction of water by aspiration into the minute air-tubes and cells of the lungs. This conclusion was derived from the following experiments. Two dogs of the same size were submerged at the same moment, but one had his windpipe plugged, so that no air or water could enter, while the other had not. After two minutes they were taken out together: the one with the windpipe plugged recovered at once, the other died. In three experi- ments dogs with their windpipes plugged were kept below water for four minutes: the animals recovered perfectly when removed from the water. (' Med.-Chir. Trans.,' 1862, p. 449.) An inspection of the bodies at once revealed the difference. In animals simply deprived of air by plugging the windpipe, the lungs were merely congested; bu<- in those which were submerged in their ordinary condition, the lun^^^, besides being more congested and showing ecchymosed points oii the surface and in the substance, contained in their bronchial tubes a bloody mucous froth formed of water, blood, and mucus, which completely filled the small air-tubes. The violent respiratory efforts made by the animal before death, had caused the production of this froth, which formed a mechanical impediment to the entrance of air by the movements of the chest, as in respiration. This mucous froth or foam issued from the lungs on section, and appeared to penetrate their entire substance, which was saturated with water tinged with blood. The lungs were sodden with water, heavy, soft, doughy, retained an impression produced by the finger, and were incapable of collapsing. In the lungs of animals which recovered after a short submersion, little


[404/872 b22652516_0404.jp2]

392 DEATH FROM SECONDARY CAUSES. or none of this mucous froth was found in the air cells. In the fatal cases, the quantit}^ was great in proportion to the time of submersion. There is no doubt that this froth is produced by the violent efforts to breathe, which are made within a minute after submersion. It may be inferred from these results that the power of recovery in human beings has a direct relation to the quantity of mucous froth in the air-tubes, and to the penetration of the substance of the lungs with water. The larger the amount of froth produced and the greater the penetration, the less the hope of recovery ; for when the lungs have undergone these changes they are physically unfitted either to receive or expel air by respiration, and are incapable of collapsing. These circumstances will account for the fact that persons have been resuscitated in drowning under various and even opposite modes of treatment, and even under no treatment at all. It is right that every reasonable effort should be made to restore life, but if the lungs are sodden with water, their functions cannot be restored by any mode of treatment. The committee found that a complete submersion of four minutes effectually killed dogs, although, after removal from water, the heart continued to beat from four to five minutes. The con- tinuance of the heart's action furnishes, therefore, no criterion of the power of recovery. A human being, as a rule, dies if submerged for a period of from four to five minutes. In a few exceptional cases, persons have been resuscitated after this period; but it is most probable that in them the lungs had sustained no physical damage. When the submersion has been short, the respiratory struggles below water slight, and the person has been treated immediately on removal, recovery is probable; but under opposite conditions, it is, with rare exceptions, hopeless. Death from Secondary Causes.—Drowning may operate indirectly as the cause of death. Thus it has been repeatedly remarked that persons who have been rescued from water in a living state, and who have apparently recovered from the effects of submersion, have died, in spite of treatment, after the lapse of some minutes or hours; others have lingered for one or two days, and then have sunk, apparently from exhaustion. In those who perish soon after removal from water, death may arise either from exhaustion or from the obstruction of respiration by the penetration of water into the air-cells of the lungs. The case of Colonel Mackenzie, in 1873, furnishes an instance of rapid death from secondary causes. The colonel and a companion, while crossing a river, were carried away by the current. After much struggling, they both reached the bank in an exhausted state. The companion left the colonel apparently well, to procure assistance. On his return, soon afterwards, the colonel was found dead. Death was attributed to apoplexy, but it was more probably due to exhaus- tion from over-exertion. A child, set. 2\ years, was found floating on water. It was insensible, with gasping breathing, fluttering heart, no pulse at the wrists, tongue protruded and cold, water draining from the mouth and nose. Artificial respiration restored breathing, but not sensibility. Convulsions followed, lasting for two hours.


[405/872 b22652516_0405.jp2]

DROWNING. EXTERNAL APPEARANCES. 393 These passed off. The breathing was natural and the body warm ; temperature, 101'2° F. In this state the child continued seven hours, when difficulty of breathing suddenly came on, and the child died eighteen or twenty hours after removal from the water. Marcet states that spasm of the glottis has been among the severe secondary symptoms in persons who have been removed from water apparently drowned. A severe spasm of this kind manifested itself in one case while placing the patient in a warm bath. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,'> 1857, i. p. 148.) When death takes place at a remote period, it may be caused by disease; and a question may thence arise, whether the disease was produced by the immersion in water or not. Such cases occasionally present themselves before our courts of assize. Post-mortem Appearances.—The external and internal appearances produced by drowning vary according to the length of time during which the body has remained in water, and the period that has elapsed after its removal and before it is examined. Thus, in reference to the bodies of two persons drowned by a common accident, if one is re-* moved and examined immediately, and the other is not removed from the water until after the lapse of several days and is then inspected, the appearances will be different. So, if the two bodies are removed at the same time, and one is immediately examined, while the other is not inspected until a month after removal, the proofs of drowning which may be discoverable in the former will probably have disappeared in the latter. A protracted exposure of the drowned body either to water or air, especially if the temperature is high, may render an inspection useless for the purpose of evidence. External Appearances.—Supposing that the body has remained in the water only a few hours after death, and the inspection has taken place immediately on its removal, the shin will be found cold and pallid —sometimes contracted, under the form of ' cutis anserina.' This con- tracted state of the skin, when found, furnishes strong evidence of the body having gone into the water hving. The skin is often covered to a greater or less extent by livid discolorations; the face is pale and calm, with a placid expression; the eyes are half open, the eyelids livid, and the pupils dilated; the mouth closed or half open; the tongue swollen and congested—frequently pushed forwards to the inner surface of the hps, sometimes indented or even lacerated by the teeth; and the lips, together with the nostrils, are covered with a mucous froth which issues from them. Kanzler has noticed in the male subject a remark- able retraction of the penis. In men who have gone living into the water, and been drowned, this appearance has been repeatedly observed by Casper and Kanzler; and the former states that he has not met with this condition of the male organ after any other form of death. In strong and robust men it has been found short, and strongly re- tracted into the skin. ('Ger. Leich.-Oeffn.,'ii. 109.) The body and limbs of a person recently drowned are usually found relaxed; but cadaveric rigidity appears to come on quickly in cases of drowning, and the body is often stiffened in the convulsed or distorted attitude which it may have had at the time of death. In a case observed by.


[406/872 b22652516_0406.jp2]

394 DROWNING. EXTERNAL APPEARANCES. Beardsley, the body of a man who was drowned under ice was found with the arms stiffened in the attitude in which he was endeavouring to support himself on the ice. Among the casual external appearances it has been noticed that the fingers and surface of the body occasionally present abrasions. Gravel, sand, mud, weeds, or other substances may be found locked within the hands or nails of drowned persons; for in the act of drowning, as common experience testifies, a person will grasp at any object within his reach, and in his efforts to extricate himself he may excoriate or wound his fingers. Substances floating in the water are also some- times found in the nose, mouth, and ears. There are, however, many cases of drowning in which such appearances do not exist. There may be no substance for the drowning person to grasp; this will depend in a great degree upon the fact of the water being deep or shallow, of its being confined within a narrow channel or not, and many other contingencies. In all cases, when the person is uncon- scious before he falls into the water, or when his death is occasioned by syncope, he will be incapable of making those exertions which are necessary to the production of this appearance, and it is probable that this frequently occurs among women who are accidentally drowned. When the body has remained several days in water, the skin of the palms of the hands and soles of the feet is found thickened, white, and sodden, as a result of imbibition. This, coupled with the lividity appearing through the sodden skin, gives rise to the appearance known as the ' cholera hand,' met with also, as the name implies, in epidemic cholera. Casper asserts that this condition may be produced by macerating a dead hand, if livid, in water. Ogston, jun., summarizes the external signs of drowning thus: general pallor of the surface of the body, with bright rosy-red patches on the face and front of the neck chiefly, sometimes on other situations. Cutis anserina on the outer aspect of the thighs and arms, and about the top of the sternum. A blanched and corrugated condition of the skin of the hands, wrists, feet, and ankles, and not infrequently of the front of the knees and back of the elbows. This state of the hands may be accompanied by what has been termed the ' cholera hand,' where venous congestion shining through the bleached cuticle gives the hand a blueish appearance, like that observed in persons suffering from cholera. A white watery froth, like the lather of soap, at the mouth and nostrils, generally found when the body is seen in a fresh state and soon after its removal from the water; or a red bloody froth at these parts when the body is decomposed. Water, sometimes mixed with froth, flows from the mouth in quantity when the body is turned face downwards. The tongue may be protruded beyond, or pressed against, and marked by, the teeth. The penis may be erect, semi- erect, or retracted, and the scrotum shrunk and wrinkled. Sand or weeds may be found under the nails, or grasped in the clenched hands. Excoriations are not infrequently observed about the knuckles, or erosions on the hands, face, ears, etc., caused by fish or other animals in the water after death. Injuries of various kinds, cuts,


[407/872 b22652516_0407.jp2]

INTERNAL APPEARANCES. 395 bruises, evidently inflicted before death, which may complicate the diagnosis, may not infrequently be found. ('Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' 1882, p. 865.) Internal Appearances.—In a recently drowned body, the lungs and heart present the appearances usually indicative of asphyxia (p. 36, ante). The venous system is generally gorged with dark-coloured liquid blood. If death has not taken place from asphyxia, or if the body has remained a long time in water before an inspection is made, the lungs and heart will not present the characters about to be de- scribed. Some physiologists have asserted that the hlood remains fluid in the bodies of the drowned; but more importance has been attached to this appearance than it really merits. Some observers have found the blood coagulated in the drowned. If the blood is found generally liquid, this may be due to the imbibition of water, or to putrefactive changes. Riedell found the blood in the heart and large vessels to contain coagula, in inspections made from two hours to five days after death. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xlvi. p. 478.) Hence it follows that the blood may be found either coagulated or uncoagulated in those who go into the water living, and die by drowning. Ogston, jun., gives the following as the internal signs of drowning : Water in the air-passages, lungs, gullet, stomach; and watery fluid in the pleural and peritoneal cavities. White watery froth in the mouth, throat, air-passages, and lungs, perhaps also in the stomach. Sand, etc., in these situations. Bulkiness or protrusion of the lungs, and over-distension or rupture of their superficial air-cells. Fluidity of the blood in the heart. Redness of the windpipe and gullet. In conjunction with these, the usual signs of asphyxia, namely, more blood in the right than in the left cavities of the heart; congestion of the lungs, liver, spleen, and kidneys; per- haps also congestion of the brain and the blood-vessels within the skull. (' Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' 1882, p. 866.) The lungs are sometimes congested, and more generally distended than collapsed. Casper and Kanzler found them, as a rule, much increased in volume, and completely filling the cavity of the chest, so that when the chest was opened they protruded out of it; but this did not depend on mere fulness of blood. The most accurate observa- tions show, in recent cases of drowning, that the lungs are generally distended and in a flabby condition. Owing to the penetration of their substance by water, they have lost their usual elasticity, so that an impression made upon them by a finger is preserved, as in a dropsical limb. Riedell has pointed out this flabby and dilated con- dition of the lungs as a special characteristic of drowning; although they floated, he found that they were three or four times as heavy as in their natural state, owing to the water in their substance. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xlvi. p. 478.) On making a section of any part of the lungs, a bloody frothy liquid escapes—air and water being mixed together in the air-cells. These appearances are only likely to be observed in a well-marked form when the body is examined soon after death. The windpipe, hronchi, and minute air-tubes of the lungs, in a recently drowned body, are filled more or less with a mucous froth


[408/872 b22652516_0408.jp2]

396 DROWNING. STATE OF THE LUNGS AND HEART. tinged with blood, as a result of the last violent efforts at respiration, when the mouth has sunk below the level of the water. This appear- ance is not always met with. Thus it has not been found in the bodies of those v/ho have sunk at once below the surface and have not again risen to breathe. But from experiments on animals, made by the Committee of the Medico-Chirurgical Society, its presence in the air- passages does not depend on the fact of a person rising to the surface, although this may increase the quantity, but rather upon the violent spasmodic efforts made to breathe, under circumstances in which water alone can enter the lungs. (' Med. Chir. Trans.,' 1862, p. 449.) These facts show that a mucous froth is produced in the air-passages even in two minutes, when there is entire submersion of the head; and its quantity appears to be in proportion to the length of submersion, and the violence of the efforts made to breathe.' The presence in the air-passages of a white, watery froth, frequently tinged with blood, may be regarded as a special character of asphyxia by drowning. When discovered in the lungs, associated with a watery condition of these organs, it furnishes a satisfactory proof of this mode of death. As its presence depends on the retention of air in thin vesicles diffused through the air-tubes, it is obvious that, except in recent inspections, i.e. within a few hours of death, it may have wholly or partly disappeared. Water passing in and out by the windpipe may destroy it—also the exposure of the body to a high temperature. This may account for the fact that it is not always observed in the inspection of the bodies of the drowned, when removed from water. Violent efforts at breathing may, however, produce it—especially if, owing to the loss of power of swallowing, any liquid should find its way into the windpipe. Independently of the presence of water (some- times mixed with mud, sand, or weeds) in the larger air-tubes, a portion of this liquid is generally drawn into the lungs by convulsive efforts at respiration. It fills the cells and penetrates the substance of the organs, giving to them the flabby and doughy consistency already described. In some cases the contents of the stomach may be found in the wind- pipe and lungs: this occurs when a person has been drowned with a full stomach. Vomiting takes place, and the vomited matters are drawn into the lungs by the attempt to breathe. According to Tardieu, the state of the lungs is different from that observed in death from suffocation. He found great congestion of the lungs, but no sub-pleural ecchyraoses. If these were present it would, in his opinion, indicate that the deceased had been suffocated before being thrown into the water. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1855, t. 2, p. 307; also 1878, t. 2, p. 174.) According to Bergeron, ecchymoses (not punctiform) are sometimes present in cases of drowning, and the intensity of congestion and their extent are always in proportion to the struggles of the animal. The state of the heart in the drowned has given rise to some dis- cussion. In death from asphyxia, the right cavities generally contain blood, while the left cavities are either empty, or they contain much less than the right. Out of fifty-three inspections made by Ogston, the right cavities were found empty only in two cases, and the left cavities


[409/872 b22652516_0409.jp2]

STATE OF THE BRAIN AND INTESTINES. 397 empty in fourteen. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xlviii. p. 291.) In a case of drowning which was examined by Bishop, the right side of the heart contained scarcely any blood ; and in another case, the only medical difficulty regarding death by drowning presented itself in an emptiness or non-distension of the right cavities of this organ. The facts and observations accumulated by Chevers show that a full condition of the heart, although a common, is not an invariable concomitant of asphyxia, either from drowning or any other cause. (' Med. Jurispr. for India,' p. 441.) It has been elsewhere remarked that the action of the heart continues after the stoppage of respiration, and that the period at which this organ ceases to contract is variable. Hence in some cases there may be sufficient power in the right cavities to contract upon their contents, and to expel, more or less completely, the last traces of blood received from the body. Emptiness of the right cavities of the heart must not, therefore, be regarded as inconsistent with death from drowning; at the same time, it cannot be taken as a proof that the person has died not from drowning. Kiedell states that in half the number of instances which had fallen under his observation, the two sides of the heart contained equal quantities of blood; in the other half, the right side contained the larger proportion. In one case only the emptiness of the left side contrasted strongly with the fulness of the right. A greater or less fulness of the vessels of the train is described as one of the appearances met with in drowning; but this, when it exists, is probably a consequence of a congested state of the lungs. Some remarks have been already made on this subject, and from these it is evident that the state of the cerebral vessels can afford no presumption that death has taken place from drowning. In regard to the cases which we have had an opportunity of examining, the quantity of blood con- tained within the cerebral vessels has rarely been so great as to call for particular notice. In examining the abdomen, it will commonly be found that the stomach contains water, which appears to enter into this organ by the act of swallowing during the struggle for life. This may be salt or fresh, according to the medium in which the drowning has taken place. The quantity is subject to great variation: sometimes it is large, at other times small, and in some instances no water whatever is to be met with. The absence of water may probably indicate a rapid death, as there could have been no power to swallow. Orfila has remarked that the mucous membrane of the stomach and bowels is occasionally much discoloured in drowned subjects. He observed also that, when drowning took place while the process of digestion was going on, the mucous membrane of the stomach often had a pinkish or violet tint. When the dead body had remained a long time in water, this mem- brane was observed to acquire a deep violet or brown colour. A knowledge of this fact may be of some importance in those cases in which a person is suspected to have been poisoned previously to sub- mersion. It has been said that the diaphragm is generally much raised towards the chest; but this may have depended on gaseous


[410/872 b22652516_0410.jp2]

DROWNING. POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES. 398 putrefaction, and the increase in the size of the abdomen by the formation of gas in the intestines. The urinary bladder in some cases contains urine, in others it is perfectly empty. Casper found it empty in one-half of the cases which he examined. It is obvious that the state in which the bladder is found must depend on its condition at the time at which the drowning occurred. (See, in reference to the appearances in the drowned, a paper by Ogston, 'Lond. Med. Gaz.,* vol. xlvii. pp. 763, 854, et seg.; Riedell, 'Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xlvi. p. 478; Casper, 'Ger. Leich.-Oeffn.,' vol. 1, p. 87; 2, p. 105; 'Klin. Novellen,' 1863, p. 523; and Ogston, jun., 'Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,^ April, 1882, p. 865.) Bergeron and Montano conclude, from their post-mortem examina- tions of drowned bodies brought to the Morgue in Paris, that the con- stant and certain sign of death by drowning is the presence of mucous froth, not only in the mouth, but in the larynx and bronchial tubes. There was always some degree of congestion, and occasionally of ecchymosis under the pleura, but this membrane never presented the dotted appearance seen after death from suffocation. The intensity of this congestion in animals drowned for experiment was in proportion to the struggles made by the animal. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1877, t. 2, p. 332.) Was Death caused hy Drowning f—For a correct solution of this question, it will be necessary to consider the appearances met with in the drowned, and to determine how far they are characteristic of this form of death. Among the external signs of drowning, when the body is seen soon after death, are paleness of the surface, a contracted state of the skin (cutis anserina), and the presence of a mucous froth about the nostrils and lips. The absence of these appearances, however, would not prove that the person had not been drowned; for if the body had remained some time in water, or if it had been long exposed to air before it was seen by a medical man, the skin would undergo various changes in its condition and colour, and mucous froth would no longer be found adhering to the lips and nostrils. Ogston, jun., thus summarizes the post-mortem appearances in the drowned:—when an external examination of the body only is allowed, if abundance of water pours from the mouth on turning the corpse face downwards, and if white watery froth is found at the mouth and nostrils, or if it be made to issue from them on compressing the chest, we may be justified in giving an opinion as to the probability of drowning, especially when the accessory signs, viz. rosy redness of the face and front of the chest, goose-skin, and bleaching and corrugation of the hands, are well marked, presuming always that no lethal injuries are seen on the body which would appear to have been inflicted before death, and no traces of corrosive action, etc., from poisons, be observ- able about the lips, hands, clothes, etc.; but that to justify us in giving a more positive opinion, we ought to have furnished to us a detailed account of the locality in which, and the circumstances under which, the body was observed before its removal to the place where it lies for examination. That where a complete inspection of the body is per-


[411/872 b22652516_0411.jp2]

STATE OF THE SKIN. SUBSTANCES GRASPED IN THE HANDS. 399 mitted, we may give a more positive opinion when, in addition to the external appearances, water in marked quantity, mixed with white watery froth, is found in the lungs and stomach, and also, perhaps, when a larger quantity of watery fluid is seen in the pleural cavities; when sand, seaweed, etc., are found in the bronchi, or even in the windpipe; when the lungs are bulky or protrude on the removal of the sternum; and when the blood within the heart is wholly fluid— especially when with these signs we find marked appearances of asphyxia in the heart, lungs, liver, etc. (' Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' 1882, p. 873.) State of the Skin.—The goose-skin, or cutis anserina, which is fre- quently observed in the drowned, shows that the skin possessed the living power of contractility at the time of immersion. Wagner suggests that the appearance might be produced in a dead body if thrown into cold water immediately after death, i.e. while the skin is warm. As none but assassins would be likely to resort to this pro- ceeding, the objection would, if admitted, merely leave the fact of drowning still to be made out by an internal inspection. This con- tracted state of the skin could hardly be mistaken for a naturally rough or horny skin, as suggested by Casper. (' Ger. Leich.-Oefln.,' vol. i., p. 89.) As this condition of the skin is not invariably present, even in the recently drowned, its absence must not be taken to negative the hypothesis of drowning. Substances grasped in the Hands.—Foreign substances, such as gravel, dirt, grass, or weeds, are sometimes found locked within the hands or lodged under the nails of drowned subjects. This fact may occasionally afford strong circumstantial evidence of the manner in which a person has died. If materials are found grasped within the hands of the deceased which have evidently been torn from the banks of a canal or river, or from the bottom of the water in which the body is found, we have strong presumptive evidence that the person died within the water. For although it is possible to imagine that the deceased may have struggled on the bank, and have been killed prior to submersion, yet in the value attached to this sign we are assuming that there are no marks of violence on the person, nor any other appearances about the body sufficiently striking to lead the examiner to suspect that death had occurred in any other way than by drowning. If the substance locked within the fingers or finger-nails is sand of the same character as that existing at the bottom of the river or pond, it is difficult to conceive any stronger fact to establish death from sub- mersion. The abrasion of the fingers is a circumstance of minor importance; no value could be attached to this state of the fingers as an indication of a person having perished by drowning, unless it were in conjunction with the appearances above described. A witness would be constrained to admit, in many cases, that the fingers might become abraded or excoriated after death, or even before submersion; while in no case could he be called upon to make, in regard to sub- stances found grasped within the hands, an admission which would invalidate the evidence deducible from this condition. This must,


[412/872 b22652516_0412.jp2]

400 DROWNING. WATER IN THE STOMACH. then, be regarded as a satisfactory proof of a person having been ahve after his body was in the water. It is well known that, when two or three are drowned by the same accident, they are not unfrequently found clasped within each other's arms,—a fact which at once proves that they must have been living when submerged: so if a dead body is discovered still holding to a rope, cable, or oar, no further evidence i-^ required to show that the deceased must have died from drowning. In 1877, the body of a gentleman was taken out of a pond on his own estate in Cornwall. His eye-glass was open and firmly grasped in his hand. There is reason to believe that he had fallen into the pond while looking at the fish. The internal appearances upon which medical jurists chiefly rely as proofs of this kind of death, are—first, water in the stomach; and, second, water with a mucous jfroth in the air-passages and lungs. 1. Water in the Stomach.—Uiedell found that, in the majority of cases of drowning, water passed into the stomach. In animals pre- viously killed, and placed for twenty-four hours in water with the mouth wide open, no fluid penetrated to the stomach. (' Lond. Med. ■Gaz.,' vol. xlvi. p. 478.) Water commonly passes into the stomach of a living animal while drowning by the act of swallowing. It has been observed that, when an animal is stunned prior to submersion, water ■does not pass into the gullet; and when syncope occurs none may be found there. As' a proof that its entrance into this organ depends on the act of swallowing, it may be stated that the quantity in the stomach is greater when an animal is allowed to come frequently to the surface and respire, than when it is maintained altogether below the surface. 'The power of swallowing is immediately suspended on the occurrence of asphyxia, and in this way we may satisfactorily account for the difference olDserved in the two cases. The water thus found is in variable quantity; and there are some cases of drowning in which water is not present in the stomach. Water does not readily penetrate into the stomach of a body which has been thrown in after death; the sides of the gullet applying themselves too closely to each other to allow of the passage of fluid. If putrefaction has advanced to a great extent, some water may enter; but a medical man will easily judge, from the general state of the body, how far this process may have been concerned in the admission of fluid into the stomach and intestines. Orfila has suggested that water may be found in the stomach of a person apparently drowned, in consequence of this liquid having been drunk by the deceased, or artificially injected by another into the stomach after death. It is difficult to conceive under what circum- stances the latter objection could be made, or what purpose it would answer; but in relying upon the presence of water in the stomach, it may be admitted that the deceased may have drunk water before his body was submerged. The mere discovery of water in the stomach, except under circumstances to be presently mentioned, is not, there- fore, a necessary proof that it has been swallowed during the act of drowning. It is, of course, presumed that the liquid contained within the


[413/872 b22652516_0413.jp2]

401 WATER AND FROTH IN THE LUNGS. stomach is of the same nature as that in which the body is immersed; for it is possible that fresh water may be found in the stomach of a person drowned in salt water, and in such a case it would be obviously improper for a medical witness to affirm, from the mere presence of water, that the person had died where his body was discovered. If the water contained mud, straw, duckweed, moss, seaweed, diatoms or other aquatic organisms, or any substance like those existing in the pond, river, or other water where the drowning occurred, this is a proof, when the inspection is recent, of its having been swallowed by a living person. The absence of w'ater from the stomach cannot, however, lead to the inference that the person has not died from drowning, because in some instances it is not swallowed, and in others it may drain away and be lost after death before an inspection is made. 2. Water with White Watery Froth in the Air-passages and Lungs. —If the body is carefully removed from the water, and is examined soon after removal, these appearances, which furnish satisfactory evidence of death from drowning, will be found. Kiedell regards the presence of a froth as a constant sign of this kind of death. In all his experiments and observations he states that he found a frothy fluid in the windpipe, bronchi, and lungs. After death it gradually disappeared from the air-tubes by exosmosis, but not from the lungs. The fluidity of this froth is, he contends, a distinctive character of death from drowning, and is not met with in any other case. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xlvi. p. 478.) These observations, made long since by Riedell, have been lately confirmed by others made at the Morgue by Bergeron and Montano. The existence of a froth in the fauces, larynx, and bronchi is, according to them, the only constant sign of death by sub- mersion, whether syncope or asphyxia preceded death. They found it in animals narcotized previously to being thrown into water. The presence of a frothy fluid would undoubtedly show that liquid, from some cause, had penetrated into the air-passages ; and when taken in conjunction with the presence of water in the substance of the lungs, it may be considered to furnish conclusive evidence of death from drowning. On the other hand, its absence does not necessarily prove that a person has not died from this cause. There may have been no convulsive efforts at breathing prior to death. A froth may not be found when the body has remained for a long period in the water after death, since by the free passage of this fluid into and out of the air- tubes, the froth, although formed in the first instance, may have dis- appeared. If, after removal from the water, the body is exposed to the air for several days before it is examined, it is rare that this appearance is seen. The froth may have been formed in the air-passages, but it may have entirely disappeared. 3. Water and Foreign Substances in the Lungs.—It has been else- where stated that, in the act of drowning, water is drawn with con- siderable force into the hmgs, by violent attempts at inspiration. The aspiratory force thus exerted by the lungs is considerable. It has been found that, when the heads of animals were plunged below mercury, some of this fluid, in spite of its great density, was actually drawn into


[414/872 b22652516_0414.jp2]

402 DROWNING. SUMMARY OF APPEARANCES. the lungs, and globules of it have been found in the air-cells. A fortiori, this takes place in a greater degree with water which is forcibly drawn into and permeates the spongy texture of the lungs, rendering recovery more difficult, and death more rapid, than in other forms of asphyxia. This aspiratory force of the lungs has been measured, and is found, in small animals, to be equal to raising a column of mercury four inches in height. Not only is water thus drawn in, but sand, mud, weeds, or other substances floating in it are also carried into the air-tubes and cells of the lungs. When the water is mixed with weeds or mud, and water presenting the same admixture is found in the throat and stomach, this is strong evidence that the body has been plunged into the medium when the power of breathing and swallowing still existed, and hence that the deceased has been drowned. An attention to the condition of the stomach and lungs together will, therefore, be of importance in cases of alleged child- murder by drowning, since it may aid in proving or disproving the charge. When a dead body is thrown into water, and has remained there some time, water with fine particles of sand, mud, or weeds, may pass through the windpipe into the lungs, and be there deposited. Water under these circumstances, however, does not penetrate into the sub- stance of the lungs as by aspiration during life, and the amount which passes through the chink of the glottis is small. If simply an after- death effect, the water is found in the larger air-tubes unaccompanied by mucous froth. In most cases, however, the effect of aspiration as a result of living power is so manifest that the examiner can have no difficulty in forming an opinion. A medical man may be occasionally required to express an opinion on the length of time that may have elapsed since the act of drowning, when the dead body of a person has been discovered in water. The rules which have been suggested for the guidance of a medical witness on these occasions are open to so many exceptions, owing to the different degrees in which putrefaction takes place in bodies exposed under similar circumstances, that they are of but little service as a basis for medical evidence. From these observations it will be per- ceived that the only characters on which reliance can be placed, as medical proofs of death from drowning, are—first, the presence of a mucous froth in the windpipe and air-tubes; second, of water in the air-tubes and air-cells of the lungs ; and third, of water in the stomach. An early inspection of the body may thus enable a medical man to come to a satisfactory conclusion that death was or was not caused by drowning. The longer this inspection is delayed, the more ambiguous the evidence becomes, since the froth slowly disappears from the air- tubes, while water may penetrate into the lungs and stomach. The great cause of failure in obtaining medical proofs of drowning is gene- rally the unavoidable delay before an inspection is made. If, in examining a body taken from the water, we find upon it marks of violence, or severe internal injuries sufficient to destroy hfe, there is strong ground for suspicion. Why the body of a person who has really


[415/872 b22652516_0415.jp2]

SPECIFIC GRAVITY OF THE BODY. died from natural causes should be afterwards thrown into water it would not be easy to explain upon any hypothesis of innocence, but we can readily appreciate the motive when murderous violence has been used. (See p. 407, post.) After the lapse of five or six weeks, especially if the body has been removed from the water for the greater part of this period, none of the usual appearances of drowning will be met with; and in the present day, no practitioner would think of seeking for evidence under such circumstances. In consequence of the uncertainty attendant on the appearances of drowning, legal ingenuity is often strained to the utmost to show that there is no certain sign of drowning, and therefore that the deceased must have died from some other cause. The general impression among non-medical persons appears to be that, whether in drowning or suffocation, there ought to be some particular visible change in some part of the body to indicate at once the kind of death; but it need hardly be said that this notion is founded on false views. A medical inference of drowning is founded upon a certain series of facts, to each of which, individually, it may be easy to oppose plausible objections ; but taken together they furnish cumulative evidence as strong as is commonly required for proof of any kind of death. In death from drowning, a question respecting the specific gravity of the human body may incidentally arise. In the healthy living body this is made up of the combined specific gravities of its different parts ; so that, as in all heterogeneous soHds, it is a complex quantity. The only part of the body which is lighter than water is fat. The specific gravity of this is 0'92, and it is calculated that the proportion of fat in an adult is about five per cent, of the weight of the body, or one- twentieth part. The specific gravity of muscle is 1*085, of brain 1*04, of the soft organs generally 1*05, of the lungs containing air 0*94, and of bone, the heaviest part of the body, 2-01. The lightness of the fatty portions is more than counterbalanced by the weight of the skeleton (about ten and a half pounds in the male, and nine pounds in the female), so that the naked human body, placed on water, has a slight tendency to sink. This tendency diminishes just in proportion to the quantity of the body immersed ; because all those parts which are out of water, not being supported by water, become so much additional weight to the portion immersed. Hence the frequent cause of death by drowning. An inexperienced person exhausts himself by exertion, raises his arms continually out of the water, and as often sinks, owing to their weight having just so much effect on his body as if a leaden weight had been suddenly applied to his feet to sink him. When the whole of the Hving body is immersed, the specific gravity, owing to the expansion of the chest, differs so little from that of water, that a very slight motion of the hands or feet will suffice to keep a person on the surface. The head, owing to the weight of the bones of the skull, has always a tendency to sink below the level of water, and muscular force is required to keep it above the surface. Neil Arnott calculated, from the weight of water displaced, that the bulk of the adult body is equal to two and a half cubic feet (about two and a quarter cubic feet.—Ed.).


[416/872 b22652516_0416.jp2]

DROWNING. BUOYANCY OF THE BODY. 404 This is tlie quantity displaced by total immersion, and its weight is about 156 pounds. There are two circumstances which cause the specific gravity of the body to vary. If the quantity of fat is pro- portionably large, it will be diminished; and such a person will float more readily than another in an opposite condition. On the other hand, a large proportion of hone renders a person heavier than his bulk of water; and his body will sink more rapidly than that of another. These two modifying causes of buoyancy are liable to constant variation; hence the different accounts given by experimentalists relative to the specific gravity of the human body. The bodies of women are, cceteris paribus, of less specific gravity than those of men: the skeleton is smaller, and there is a greater proportion of fat: hence they more readily float. The bodies of infants and young children float with the greatest ease; the quantity of fat is usually in large proportion, and the bones are light—the earthy matter being not yet fully deposited. Thus, in infanticide by drowning, the body of a child that has fully respired rises very speedily to the surface—if, indeed, it does not remain altogether upon it. If the lungs are emptied while the face is under water and the person cannot inhale again, the body remains specifically heavier than water, and will sink. Hence it follows that, cceteris paribus, a person with a large and capacious chest floats more easily than one whose chest is small and contracted. Hence, also, in a living person the body has a tendency to rise out of water during inspiration, and to sink during expiration—the quantity of water displaced under these two opposite conditions of the respiratory organs being very different. The entrance into water with the chest nearly emptied as the result of a loud scream or shriek is very unfavourable to the buoyancy of the body. The fact of clothes being on the person may also make a difference—either, from their nature, in serving to buoy up the body, or from their weight to sink it more deeply. Women are sometimes saved from drowning by reason of their clothes floating, and thus presenting a large surface to the water; it is partly owing to this circumstance that the bodies of drowned women often remain floating on the water immediately after death. It may be laid down as a general rule, that the recently dead body unclothed is, when left to itself, heavier than water, and sinks when immersed. The expulsion of air from the lungs and their penetration by water, combined with the fact that the bones and all the soft parts, excepting the fat, are of greater specific gravity than water, offer a sufficient explanation of the sinking. After a variable period, generally not more than a few days, the body will rise again to the surface, and float. The period of its rising will depend—first, on the specific gravity of the body; second, on the nature of the water, whether salt or fresh; third, on the access of heat and air in facilitating putrefaction. If the gases generated find an escape, the body will sink; more gases may form, and then it will again rise, so that the sinking and rising may become alternate phenomena. A small quantity of air collected in the abdomen, as a result of putrefaction, will suffice for the floating of the


[417/872 b22652516_0417.jp2]

MARKS OF VIOLENCE ON THE DROWNED. body. Thus, taking the specific gravity of the dead body at 1-08 to 1*1, it would require but little air to keep it at or near the surface of the water. But a dead body, whether death has been caused by drowning or not, may not sink at all, owing to some one of the counter- acting causes above mentioned. Several cases are reported in which the bodies of persons recently drowned have floated. Marks of Violence on the Drowned.—The chief inquiry with regard to marks of violence on the bodies of the drowned is, whether they have resulted from accident or design. In forming an opinion, a witness must give due value to the accidents to which a body floating loosely in water may be exposed^ Bruises or ecchymoses of consider- able extent are sometimes seen on the drowned when the bodies have been carried by a current against mechanical obstacles in a navigable river or canal. If the deceased fell from a considerable height into water, his body in falling may have struck against a rock or projection, which may have produced extensive marks of violence. Dead bodies taken out of wells often present considerable marks of violence inflicted during life when the deceased persons have fallen in accidentally or have thrown themselves in intentionally. The presence of these marks must not create a hasty suspicion of murder. It is manifestly impos- sible to lay down any specific rules for forming a decision in cases of this kind, since, probably, no two instances will be met with which will be perfectly similar in the details. In clearing up these doubtful points, everything must depend on the tact and experience of the practitioner who is called upon to conduct an investigation. There may be a severe cut in the throat arising from a previous attempt at suicide, as in the case of Sands (July, 1878), who destroyed his three children by cutting their throats, and then cut his own throat; but as the wound involved only the branches of the external carotid artery, he was able to walk to a pond about thirty yards away, in which his dead body was subsequently found. The first question which a medical jurist has to determine is whether the wounds or injuries on the body were produced before or after death. (See Wounds, ante, p. 237.) If after death, then they ought to be obviously of accidental origin. If the injuries show intentional violence, it will be proper to consider whether they are such as to be consistent with a suicidal attempt, or whether they indicate homicide. (See Wounds, ante, p. 254.) Men have been known to produce very severe wounds on the throat, resembling homicidal wounds, and still to have retained the power of throwing themselves into a pond or canal. A case of this kind was the subject of an inquest in 1877. In 1878, the dead body of a man was found in the Serpentine, with a bullet-wound traversing the chest in the region of the heart, likely to have caused immediate death. It was proved that the deceased had been seen on the parapet of the bridge with a revolver, and that immediately after the report of a pistol, his body had been seen to fall over into the water. Thus were the facts readily explained. Care must be taken not to mistake the ravages of carnivorous animals, as rats, etc., on the dead body. The injuries thus produced have been mistaken for the results of acts of violence inflicted during life.


[418/872 b22652516_0418.jp2]

4o6 MARKS OF VIOLENCE ON THE DROWNED. Accidental violence may sometimes be of so serious a nature that a practitioner might well doubt whether it did not indicate that the deceased had been violently treated prior to submersion. If a dead body were taken out of water, with one or more limbs dislocated, or the vertebrae of the neck fractured, and a surgeon was asked whether such injuries could be accidental and coincident with or consequent on drowning, the answer would probably be in the negative. But an instance has occurred in which both arms of a man were accidentally dislocated at the shoulders in the act of drowning, as the result of a fall into the water from a great height. The great point with regard to all marks of violence on the drowned is to throw light upon the questions—first, whether drowning was really the cause of death ; and second, whether, if so, the act was the result of accident, suicide, or homicide. This last question does not concern a medical witness so much as a jury, who will determine it from the facts, medical and general, proved before them. There is one case, of rare occurrence, in which a practitioner would be apt to be misled by trusting to appearances found on the drowned. If a dead body were removed from water with a deep ecchymosed circle round the neck, evidently produced by a cord or ligature no traces of which could be found, it is not improbable that a strong suspicion would be raised that deceased had been murdered by strangu- lation, and the body afterwards thrown into water. A mark was produced on the neck of a woman who was accidentally drowned, as a result of the compression produced by the string of her cloak. Marks resembling those of strangulation have been produced on the necks of bodies floating in water, when soon after death they have been driven by a strong current against the stumps of trees or other obstacles in the stream. It might be said that, in cases of this description, circum- stantial evidence would commonly show how the mark had originated. In admitting the truth of this observation, we must remember that cir- cumstances, as matters of proof, do not always present themselves to our notice, or occur to our judgment, at the precise time that the law stands most in need of them. While, then, we use great caution in drawing an inference when there are such strong grounds for suspicion, we should not neglect to examine carefully the slightest appearances of violence on a body. Fractures are not often met with in the drowned as the result of . accident. Certain fractures likely to be followed by immediate death may forbid the supposition of their having occurred after drowning, and a careful examination of the body may show that they were not likely to have arisen from accident at or about the time of submersion. The question has arisen whether fractures of the vertehrce of the neck can occur from accident alone, at or about the time of drowning. In 1858, a gentleman, in jumping from a bathing-machine head foremost into water more shallow than he had expected, caused a fracture and displacement of the cervical vertebrae, which led to death. A similar accident occurred in 1877. The deceased in this case dived, rose to the surface foaming at the mouth, and immediately sank. He waa


[419/872 b22652516_0419.jp2]

407 HOMICIDAL AND SUICIDAL DROWNING. removed from the water and taken to St. Thomas's Hospital. He recovered consciousness, but lost all power in his limbs from his arms downwards. He soon died, and it was found that there was fracture and displacement of the vertebrae of the neck. The accident was caused by deceased's head coming in contact with the brick bottom of the bath. South quotes the case of a man who threw himself into a river to bathe from a height of seven or eight feet, the water being only three feet deep. He rose to the surface, but fell back senseless. When he recovered his consciousness, the account he gave of the accident was that he felt his hands touch the bottom of the river, but to save his head drew it violently back, upon which he lost all conscious- ness. He died in about ten hours, and on examination the skin of the back of the neck was much ecchymosed, the interspaces of the muscles were gorged, and the spinal canal was filled, with blood. The body of the fifth vertebra of the neck was broken across about the middle of its depth, and the two pieces were completely separated from the lateral parts. As there was no mark of contusion or dirt on the head, Keveillon, who reports the case, believes that the fracture arose from muscular action, and not from a blow received by striking the bottom; but this is doubtful. In another instance a sailor jumped headlong into the sea to bathe, a sail being spread three feet below the surface. He imme- diately became motionless, and died in forty-eight hours. The fourth and fifth vertebrae of the neck were foimd exclusively fractured, and the spinal marrow was crushed and lacerated. (Chelius's ' Surgery,' Part 6: Fractures.) In this case the fracture must have resulted from contact with the water or the sail; but as the latter was freely floating, this would be a yielding medium; hence this serious injury may occur accidentally in cases in which we might not be prepared to look for it. Delens has directed attention to fractures and other injuries found on the drowned bodies recovered from the Seine in Paris. Some of these have been wrongly referred to acts of murderous violence. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1878, t. 2, p. 433.) There is some reason to believe that cases of homicidal violence are frequently overlooked in the inspection of bodies found in water. (See * Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1878, i. p. 96.) There is usually no post-mortem examination made for a coroner's inquest, the external inspection is hastily conducted, and the common verdict of ' found drowned' means simply found in the water. In April, 1891, the editor found strychnine in fatal dose in the stomach of a child whose dead body was found in a weighted basket at the bottom of a river. It is easy to perceive that, had no analysis been made, this child might have been supposed to have been drowned. Was Drowning the result of Homicide, Suicide, or Accident?—Drown- ing is a frequent cause of death. From a return made to the House of Commons in 1878, it appears that the total deaths by drowning in the inland waters of England and Wales during the year 1877 were 2662, —namely, 2140 males and 522 females. Of the 2662, 1423 perished in rivers or running waters, 637 in canals, and 602 in lakes or ponds. Although the question whether the act of drowning was the result of


[420/872 b22652516_0420.jp2]

DROWNING IN SHALLOW WATER. 4o8 suicide or murder properly falls within the province of a jury, there are certain points in relation to it, which require to be noticed by a medical witness. In the first place, it is not to be imagined that an examina- tion of the body will show any differences in either of the three supposed kinds of death. So far as the phenomena of drowning are concerned, they are the same, and they are accompanied by the same appearances after death in each case. In drowning which is accidental or suicidal, it is not usual, as it has already been observed, to meet with marks of violence on the person, except such as are purely of accidental origin, and have commonly been produced after death. In accidental drowning this is almost a constant rule; but if the person has fallen from any height, his body may be injured in the fall, either by projec- tions on the banks of a river or canal, or by mere concussion on the water—allowance for either of which we must be prepared to make, according to the situation of the spot from which the person is supposed to have fellen. The following curious case of supposed suicidal drowning, though the appearances might well give rise to a suspicion of homicide, was communicated to the editor by Lowndes, of Liverpool. It occurred in the autumn of 1884. The body of a girl, set. 12|- years, was found floating in a canal, perfectly nude. The post-mortem examination led to the conclusion that death had resulted from drowning; the body had not been immersed more than twenty-four hours. On the middle of each thigh was an extensive wound, apparently of a post-mortem character, and attributable to the body having been injured by the lock-gates. There were no other wounds or bruises. The state of the genitals pointed to recent sexual intercourse; but the immersion of the body in water would have removed blood and semen. Several weeks later, the girl's clothes were found in the mud of the canal. They bore evidence of rough usage, the sleeves of the jacket being torn off —one being turned inside out, and the other being missing. It was thought that the clothing might have been washed off by a powerful sluice of water. The sexual intercourse was consistent with the lewd habits of the deceased. It is calculated that in England drowning is the cause of death in nearly one-half of all suicides; but this, of course, will vary according to localities. In suicidal drowning we have a difficulty to encounter which we do not meet with in that which is accidental. A man may have attempted suicide by some other means previous to throwing himself into the water; thus, then, besides the accidental violence of accidental drowning, we may meet with violence on the person, evidently indicating wilful perpetration. What is the nature of this violence ? Is it to be defined ? Can it always be distinguished from that which is positively homicidal ? The answers to these questions must depend on the circumstances proved in each case. Droiuning in Shallow Water.—Homicide has been sometimes pre- sumed from the peculiar circumstances under which a body has been discovered. Thus, for instance, it has been a debated question whether a person intent on suicide can voluntarily drown himself in shallow


[421/872 b22652516_0421.jp2]

DROWNING IN SHALLOW WATER. 409 water, as in a bath, by turning upon his face and retaining this posi- tion with his mouth below the level of the water. This question has been long since settled in the affirmative by the occurrence of well- authenticated cases. It appears to have been raised originally on the theoretical view that the resolution of a suicide would fail him in such a situation, and that, having the means of escape, he would lose no time in extricating himself. It need hardly be stated that the mere immersion of the mouth in water not more than a few inches deep will produce all the phenomena of death by drowning; with the exception that little or no water would probably be found in the stomach. A man may thus die in two or three minutes. Devergie mentions an instance where a man was found drowned in a small stream, his face towards the ground, and his head just covered by the water, which was not more than a foot in depth. On dissection, there were all the appearances of drowning present, and a large quantity of sand and gravel was found occupying the windpipe and smaller air-tubes. In 1874, a drunken man fell with his head across a shallow ditch. He was found dead, and it was obvious that his body had so dammed up the water that it had flowed over his face, and thus caused his death by drowning. He was powerless to save himself. A woman com- mitted suicide by breaking a hole in the ice of a pond during the winter, and thrusting her head into the water, the rest of her body being out. A man was found dead with his face downwards in a small stream of water only six inches deep. The water was so shallow that it did not cover the deceased's body or his head. There was clear evidence that this was a case of suicidal drowning. Although a person has for a short time the power of removing from a position in which he must speedily die, that power is soon lost. If the mouth is kept below water by a strong voluntary effort for half a minute or longer, the unaerated blood is circulated through the brain, and the person becomes powerless, so that his fate is not now in his own hands. Lunatics and other persons have thus destroyed them- selves in shallow baths, when left unwatched by the attendant for only four or five minutes. The discovery of dead bodies under these circumstances is, therefore, quite consistent with suicide, but it does not necessarily prove that the act was suicidal. It cannot be denied that a person, if young or enfeebled by disease or age, may be held by others in such a position sufficiently long to produce death from drown- ing, but if he is capable of making resistance, we ought to find some marks of violence on the limbs or body. So, again, such a position is by no means incompatible with accidental drowning; and on this it may happen that a medical practitioner will be called to express an opinion. A man in a state of intoxication, or when suddenly attacked by syncope, epilepsy, or apoplexy, may fall with his face in a gutter, ditch, or small pool of water; and he may die in this position, not having the power to extricate himself. Even marks of violence on the body must not be too hastily construed into proofs of murder. Some years since a case of this description gave rise to a trial for murder in one of the midland counties. A man was found dead with his face in some


[422/872 b22652516_0422.jp2]

4IO DROWNING FROM PARTIAL IMMERSION. LIGATURES. melted snow, and there were several severe bruises on his body. The evidence showed that, after a quarrel, he had left a neighbouring inn much intoxicated; and it was rendered probable that he had perished accidentally on his way home. There was no reason to suppose that he had been murdered. Infants, from mere helplessness, may be drowned under similar circumstances ; but at the same time, an assassin may select this mode of destroying life in order to give the appearance of accident. Death from Partial Immersion.—There is no doubt that murder by drowning may be perpetrated without the whole of the body being immersed in water. A case of this kind, which was the subject of a criminal trial, occurred in 1841 {Reg. v. Yaxley, Norwich Lent. Ass.), and the prisoner was convicted. It appears that the mode in which the prisoner destroyed her infant child was by immersing its head for a few minutes in a pail of water. She removed it before it was quite dead; but it soon died, after slight convulsive movements of the hmbs. The case was rendered obscure by the fact that the whole of the body had evidently not been immersed; and the only conceivable means of drowning were in a small duck-pond adjoining the house, which was covered with weeds; but no weed was found in the stomach of the child, although a quantity of water was there present. Suicide by drowning may take place as the result of partial immer- sion—the immersion of the head. Several cases of this kind have occurred. In 1877, a Mr. Stagg, of Birmingham, was found dead with his head downwards in a water-butt, and his legs protruding over the top. In 1877, a woman was found dead in London; she was in a stooping position on the floor, and her face downwards in a pail of water. In 1878, a woman was found dead with her head immersed in a water-tank onl}'' a foot wide; she had so placed her head that it was under the bar of the ball-tap. These cases show determined acts of suicide. On several occasions, however, persons, whilst examining water-cisterns, have fallen into them, and perished accidentally—the head only being immersed. Ligatures on the Hands and Feet.—When a drowned body is removed from water with the hands or the hands and feet bound with cords, it is usually considered that we have therein presumptive evidence of homicide; but numerous cases are recorded in which suicides have actually bound themselves in this manner, or have attached heavy weights to their bodies, before throwing themselves into water, for the express purpose of preventing any chance of their escaping death.


[423/872 b22652516_0423.jp2]

HANGING. CAUSE OF DEATH. 411 HANGING. CHAPTER 39. CAUSE OP DEATH.—DEATH FKOM THE SECONDARY EFFECTS.—POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES.—MARK OF THE CORD OR LIGATURE.—WAS DEATH CAUSED BY HANGING?—HANGING AFTER DEATH.—SUMMARY OP MEDICAL EVI- DENCE.—MARKS OF VIOLENCE ON THE HANGED,—WAS THE HANGING THE RESULT OP ACCIDENT, SUICIDE, OR HOMICIDE?—THE POSITION OF THE BODY. Cause of Death. Asphyxia.—By hanging we are to understand that kind of death in which the body is wholly or partially suspended by the neck and the constricting force is the weight of the body itself, while in strangulation the constricting force is due to some other cause. In both cases death commonly results from asphyxia (p. 36), although this must depend in a great measure upon the position of the ligature on the neck as well as on the degree of pressure pro- duced. If the cord is loose, or applied to the upper part of the neck, a small quantity of air may still reach the lungs, and then the cerebral circulation may become interrupted by the compression of the great vessels of the neck. In this case apoplexy of the congestive kind is induced, and operates as the immediate cause of death. It is easy to conceive that there may be a mixed condition of asphyxia and apoplexy, and according to the observations of Casper and Remer, this is actually met with in a great number of cases of death from hanging. A man, set. 57, committed suicide by hanging. After being suspended for an hour, he was cut down. As the doubled rope was slackened from the neck, air escaped through the larynx, and a prolonged, rather loud groan was heard. As an explanation, Holland suggests that the suicide, in hanging himself, drew in a deep breath, and the sudden and violent constriction of the neck retained the air in the chest until the ligature was removed. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1875, i. p. 575.) In the execution of criminals, death takes place at different intervals of time after suspension. This difference is probably dependent on the greater or less degree of constriction produced by the ligature. If the rope should press upon the larynx or above this organ, the closure of the air-passages will not be so complete as if pressed upon the wind- pipe immediately below the cricoid cartilage. A slight degree of respiration might in the former case continue for a short interval, in which the life of a person would be prolonged, while, in the latter, death would be immediate. If the windpipe is in part ossified, the pressure of the ligature is less perfect, and death will then take place


[424/872 b22652516_0424.jp2]

412 HANGING. CAUSE OF DEATH. more slowly. Louis found that an occasional cause of death in hanging was a displacement of the second vertebra of the neck, whereby the spinal marrow was suddenly compressed. As a general rule, this cause of death is only likely to be observed in corpulent or heavy persons, when a long drop is given, and when much violence has been at the same time employed by the executioner. Fractures of the vertebrae may occur, and prove fatal by compressing the spinal marrow. Death may also be caused suddenly, by cerebral congestion from pressure on the blood-vessels, or by the effusion of blood on the spinal membranes. This is likely to happen when the head falls, or is bent suddenly back- wards, so that the weight of the body is supported on the back of the neck. Death from hanging appears to take place very rapidly, and without causing any pliysical suffering to the person. It is observed that in those criminals who are executed, there are sometimes violent con- vulsions of the limbs and trunk. There is no reason, however, to believe that the individual suffers pain, any more than in the convulsions of an epileptic fit. On recovery there is an entire loss of consciousness of pain in both cases. The circulation of dark-coloured blood through the brain and spinal cord may account for these effects. Eff'orts to inspire are made for one or two minutes after the closure or com- pression of the windpipe. The diaphragm and intercostal muscles act spasmodically, but no air enters the lungs; and it is probable that in the act of hanging, part of the air contained in the organs is convulsively expelled. When the suspension of the body has only continued a few minutes, it has often been found impossible to restore life; and indeed, the period at which resuscitation may take place varies according to circumstances. Supposing the hanging to be un- attended with violence to parts about the neck, some persons might be resuscitated after five minutes' suspension or longer, but then it has been observed that they have subsequently died from secondary causes affecting the brain and nervous system. Others, again, may not be recovered when they are cut down immediately after suspension—a fact which depends probably on the different degrees to which asphyxia or apoplexy has extended. When the ligature is so placed as to press on the windpipe below the larynx, insensibility and death are almost instantaneous. Patenko has investigated asphyxia due to mechanical causes, and draws a clear distinction between the appearances met with according as the access of air is shut off" at the end of an expiration or at the end of an inspiration. He shows that, if a dog be hanged, the drop taking effect as expiration is completed, the efforts at inspiration results in engorgement of the lungs; whereas if the drop takes effect at the moment when inspiration is completed, the lungs are comparatively bloodless. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1885, t. 1, p. 209.) Death from the Secondary Effects.—It by no means follows that, because we have succeeded in restoring the respiratory process, a person is safe. Death may take place by a fatal relapse at various periods after the accident. A case of this description was published by


[425/872 b22652516_0425.jp2]

SECONDARY CAUSES OF DEATH. Brodie. A boy, set. 17, was found hanging. When cut down he was insensible, his face hvid, his Hps of a dark purple colour, the pulse not perceptible, the pupils dilated and motionless. Artificial respiration was used, and in a quarter of an hour the diaphragm began to act. He breathed at irregular intervals with stertor, and with a rattling noise in the throat. The pulse became perceptible, but often flagging, and the surface of the body was cold. The countenance was still livid, but the pulse and breathing had improved. At the end of another hour an attempt was unsuccessfully made to take some blood from the arm, and the patient was placed in a warm bath. The breathing was stertorous through the night, and in the morning twelve ounces of blood were taken from the arm; but there was no relief. He continued insensible, and cold on the surface; there was frothing at the mouth, and he died twenty-four hours after he was cut down. The body was carefully examined. The vessels of the brain were very full of blood : this was the only morbid appearance. We iearn from those who have been resuscitated, as well as from experiments performed by persons upon themselves, that the insensi- bility of asphyxia comes on in the most insidious manner in death from hanging, and that a slight constriction of the windpipe will speedily produce loss of consciousness and muscular power. (' Devergie,' 2, 370.) The only symptoms of which the hanged persons have been conscious were a hissing in the ears, a flash of light before the eyes, then darkness and oblivion. The only profitable inference, in a medico- legal view, which can be drawn from observations of this kind is that asphyxia is not only rapidly induced, but that it supervenes under circumstances where it would not be generally expected to occur—i.e. when the weight of the body is in great part supported. Fleischmann found that a cord might be placed round his neck between the chin and hyoid bone, and tightened either laterally or posteriorly without perceptibly interrupting respiration ; but while the respiratory process was thus carried on, his face became red, his eyes prominent, and his head felt hot. These symptoms were followed by a sense of weight, a feeling of incipient stupefaction, and a hissing noise in the ears. On the occurrence of this last symptom, the experiment, he says, should be discontinued, or the consequences may be serious. His first experi- ment on himself lasted two minutes; but in the second, owing to the cord by its pressure more completely interrupting respiration, the noise in the ears appeared in half a minute. When the pressure was applied on the windpipe, the effect was instantaneous, but when on the cricoid cartilage it was not immediate. If it was applied between the hyoid bone and the thyroid cartilage, or on the hyoid bone itself, the period during which a person could breathe was extremely short; and this result was more striking when the act of expiration was performed at the moment of applying the pressure. The death of Scott, the American diver, in 1840, shows how readily asphyxia may be induced by a slight compression of the throat, even when a person might be supposed to have both the knowledge and the power to save himself. This man was in the habit of making


[426/872 b22652516_0426.jp2]

414 HANGING. POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES. public experiments on hanging, and had frequently before gone through them without danger; but on the last occasion, it is probable that a slight shifting of the ligature from under the jawbone caused so much compression on the throat between the chin and larynx as speedily to produce asphyxia. No attempt was made to save him until it was too late, and he was not brought to a hospital until thirty-three minutes had elapsed. He was allowed to hang thirteen minutes, the spectators thinking that the deceased was only prolonging the experiment for their gratification. The very insidious and painless manner in which a person who is suspended passes from life into death is also well illustrated in the report of the case of Hornshaw. (' Lancet,' 1847, i. p. 404.) This man was on three occasions resuscitated from hanging —a feat which, like Scott, he had performed in London for public gratification. He stated that on the last occasion he lost his senses almost at once; it seemed as if he could not get his breath, and that some great weight was attached to his feet: he felt that he could not move his hands or legs to save himself, and that the power of thinking was gone. It is not improbable that many persons have thus lost their lives by privately attempting these experiments, and their cases have been wrongly set down to acts of suicide. There is reason to believe that boys have thus frequently but unintentionally destroyed themselves, from a strange principle of imitation or curiosity. In 1874, a boy, set. 11, in order to frighten his parents, tied a knot in his hand- kerchief, and put one part of it over the knob of the upright at the foot of the staircase, and the other underneath his chin, so that the ligature did not go round his neck. His dead body was found suspended in the loop, which had pressed against the windpipe and produced speedy unconsciousness. Post-mortem Appearances.—The external appearances met with in the hanged have been generally taken by medico-legal writers from those seen in the bodies of criminals who have been executed, or those who have been violently hanged. Thus among them are the follow- ing: lividity and swelling of the face, especially of the lips, which appear distorted ; the eyelids swollen, and of a blueish colour; the eyes red, projecting forwards, and sometimes partially forced out of their cavities; the tongue enlarged, livid, and either compressed between the teeth or sometimes protruded; the lower jaw retracted, and a bloody froth about the lips and nostrils. There is a deep and eccliymosed impression around the neck, indicating the course of the cord, the skin being occasionally excoriated; laceration of the muscles and liga- ments in the hyoideal region; laceration or contusion of the larynx, or of the upper part of the windpipe. There are also, commonly, circumscribed patches of ecchymosis, varying in extent, about the upper part of the body and the upper and lower limbs, with a deep livid discoloration of the hands; the fingers are generally much con- tracted or firmly clenched, and the hands and nails, as well as the ears, are livid ; the urine, faeces, and spermatic or prostatic fluid are sometimes involuntarily expelled at the moment of death. Such appearances will rarely be found in those cases of suicidal hanging which are likely


[427/872 b22652516_0427.jp2]

EXTERNAL AND INTERNAL APPEARANCES. to come before a medical practitioner. In these, the face is generally pale, and the mark on the neck is a simple depression in the skin, usually without ecchymosis, and acquiring a horny or parchment colour only after some time. Esquirol found, in one instance, that when the body was examined immediately after death, the face was not livid; but it first began to assume a violet hue in eight or ten hours. He thought that, when the cord was left round the neck, the face would be livid, but if removed immediately after suspension, pale. This view is not, however, borne out by observation. The tongue is not always protruded. Devergie found that there was protrusion of this organ in eleven out of twenty-seven cases. This protrusion was formerly supposed to depend upon the position of the ligature: thus it was said, when this was below the cricoid cartilage, the whole of the larynx was drawn up- wards, and the tongue carried forwards with it; while, when above the hyoid bone, the tongue was drawn backwards. The protrusion or non- protrusion of the tongue does not depend upon any mechanical effect of this kind, but simply upon congestion ; for it is occasionally met with thus protruding in cases of drowning and suffocation. Besides, the protrusion has not been found to have any direct relation to the position of the ligature. There is another appearance on which a remark may be made— namely, the state of the hands. As a general rule, in violent hanging or strangulation, the hands are clenched. This appearance may not always be found, as it may exist and be destroyed before the body undergoes medical inspection. When the constriction of the neck is produced suddenly, and with great violence, we may expect to meet with it. Thus it is found in the cases of executed criminals, and in strangulation attended with great violence, whether the act be due to homicide or suicide. In cases in which the constriction is gradually produced, the clenched state of the hands may not be found. Con- vulsions generally attend violent hanging or strangulation. The influence of these on the attitude or dress may not be apparent unless the body is in a sitting position or lying down. Internally^ we meet with the appearances of asphyxia—i.e. engorge- ment of the lungs and venous system generally with dark-coloured fluid blood; the lungs otherwise present no particular appearance. In the case of an executed criminal they were in a state of extreme collapse. (' Lancet,' 1867, ii. p. 576.) This is an unusual appearance. The right side of the heart, and the great vessels connected with it, are commonly distended with blood. But when the inspection has been delayed for several days, this distention may not be observed. The mucous membrane of the windpipe is more or less congested, and is sometimes covered with a fine bloody mucous froth. This may be owing to imperfectly obstructed respiration, and to spasmodic efforts at breathing. The vessels of the brain are commonly found con- gested ; and in some rare instances it is said extravasation of blood has been met with on the membranes or in the substance of the organ. Effusion of blood is, however, so rare that Remer found this appear- -ance described only once among one hundred and one cases; and in


[428/872 b22652516_0428.jp2]

4i6 HANGING. THE MARK ON THE NECK. one hundred and six cases recorded by Casper, it was not found in a single instance. In one case Brodie found a large effusion of blood in the substance of the brain, and he refers to another case in which there was a considerable effusion between the membranes. (' Lect. on Pathology,' p. 58.) The venous congestion of the cerebral vessels is, however, rarely greater than in other cases of asphyxia, and is pro- bably dependent on the degree in which the lungs have become en- gorged. In most instances there is increased redness of the substance of the brain, so that, on making a section of the hemispheres, a greater number of bloody points (puncta cruenta) than usual will appear. The kidneys have been found much congested. A more important circumstance has been noticed by Yellowly—namely, that in ex- amining the stomachs of five criminals who had been hanged, he found great congestion in all, while there was blood coagulated upon the mucous membrane in two. Such an appearance might, it is obvious, be attributed in a suspicious case to the action of some irritant sub- stance. (See p. 66, ante; ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1830, p. 166 ; 1835, p. 208 ; 1838, p. 471.) In the case of Good, who was executed, the stomach was found on inspection to present over its whole surface a well-marked redness, resembling the effect produced by an irritant poison. The redness was especially observed at the pyloric end, where it assumed a somewhat striated character. A drawing representing the appearance of the interior of the stomach is preserved in the Museum of Guy's Hospital. In another case the stomach and intestines, especially the inner coat of the former, were much congested and inflamed, as if the man had died from poisoning. The contents lof the stomach were analysed, but no poison was found. Chevers, who quotes this case, states that he has more than once verified Yellowly's observation, and has found the mucous membrane of the stomach much congested in death from hanging. (' Med. Jurispr. for India,' p. 397.) The most striking external appearance, however, is the marJc produced on the neck by the cord or ligature. The skin is commonly depressed, and sometimes ecchymosed, but rarely throughout its whole extent; it is frequently free from all traces of discoloration as the result of ecchymosis, the skin in the depression being then hard, brown, or of a joarchment colour and consistency; or there may be only a thin line of blue or livid colour in the upper or lower border of the depression, and chiefly in front. The course of the mark is generally oblique, being lower in the fore part than behind, and it is often interrupted. It is most commonly above the larynx. If the noose should happen to be in front, the mark may be circular, the jaw preventing the ligature from rising upwards in the same degree before, as it commonly does behind. The mark is generally single, but we may meet with it double, as when the ligature has been formed into two circles or loops previously to its application. Its other characters will depend upon the nature of the ligature employed. Thus a large and wide ligature rarely produces ecchymosis,—the mark is wide and superficial; but a small ligature produces a narrow and deep depression, sometimes accompanied with abrasion of the cuticle and effusion of blood beneath


[429/872 b22652516_0429.jp2]

APPEARANCES OF THE NECK. the skin. The ligature or cord should always be examined for blood, hair, or other suspicious substances. It was formerly beHeved that the mark on the skin produced by the cord was invariably discoloured from effusion of blood, or ecchy- mosis; but more correct observation has shown that this condition is an exception to the general rule. When ecchymosis does exist, it is commonly superficial and of slight extent. There is rarely, if ever, effusion of blood in the cellular tissue. In the bodies of criminals who have been executed, it is not unusual to find ecchymosis, but even here it is not always present, or only in front of the neck. Riecke found only once in thirty cases an effusion of blood beneath and on both sides of the depression produced by the ligature. The tongue was generally between the teeth, and in most cases wounded by them. He attributed death to stretching of the spinal marrow. (Henke's ' Zeitsehrift,' 1840, 27 Erg. H. 332.) In a ease which the author had an opportunity of examining, there was only a slight trace of ecchymosis in one spot where the knot in the cord had pro- duced contusion. That it should occur in criminal executions is not surprising, considering the violence employed on these occasions; but it has been somewhat too hastily assumed that the appearances found in executed criminals are met with in all cases of death from hanging. King, in examining the neck of an executed criminal, did not discover the smallest effusion of blood in the course of the cord, although in this case the body had been allowed to fall from a height of seven feet and a half, with a fearful jerk. (' Dub. Quart. Jour..,' 1854, ii. p. 86; and ' Cases of Ruptured Intestine,' 1855, p. 12.) The theory of the production of ecchymosis has been carried so far that a livid mark in the course of the cord was formerly said to be the best criterion for distinguishing hanging in the living from hanging in the dead body. This statement, however, is not in accordance with facts. In a large number of cases the skin, instead of being blue or livid, or presenting an effusion of blood in the cellular tissue beneath, is hard and of a yellow colour, resembling parchment. It has that appearance which the cutis commonly assimmes when the cuticle has been removed from it two or three days; and, on dissecting it, the cellular membrane beneath often appears condensed and of a silvery whiteness. Chevers states that in cases of death from hanging he has not met with any ecchymosis in the skin along the course of the mark. (Op. cit., p. 406.) The editor can confirm this observation. In some instances the mark has presented itself simply as a white depression ; this has been chiefly observed in fat subjects. The observations of Casper on this point were that in two-thirds of all the cases examined, ecchymosis was entirely absent. He also found that there was no difference in the appearance whether the ligature was removed sooner or later after death. Injuries to the muscles and deep-seated parts of the neck are, of course, only likely to be seen when considerable violence has been used in hanging. It is now customary in criminal executions to give a long drop to the body, i.e. from six to eight or more feet. Under 2 E


[430/872 b22652516_0430.jp2]

WAS DEATH CAUSED BY HANGING? 4i8 these circumstances, the muscles of the neck are found bruised and lacerated. In two instances the head was wrenched off. The sterno- cleido mastoid muscle has been found torn through, and its ends nearly two inches apart. In other instances the lining membrane of the common carotid artery has been found lacerated. Congestion and swelling of the genital organs in both sexes have been set down among the common consequences of hanging; but many observers have not met with these conditions, and it is doubtful whether, unless the body is examined speedily after suspension, any marked difference would be discovered. A more common sign, perhaps, is a discharge from the urethra in the male, by spasmodic action, at the moment at which death takes place. It appears that no reliance can be placed upon evidence derivable from this appearance, and yet it has sufficed to give rise to a violent controversy among French medical jurists. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1839, t. 1, pp. 169,467; t. 2, p. 393; 1840, t. 2, p. 314.) Unless death from hanging is strongly established by other facts, neither the examina- tion of the linen of the deceased, nor the application of the microscope to the mucous fluid found in the urethra, would be of any practical value in elucidating the question. In a criminal execution which took place at Dubhn, in which there was a fall of fourteen feet, the head was severed from the body. There was no dislocation of the vertebrae. The atlas was intact, but the axis was fractured. Blood flowed from the head in greater quantity than from the body. The carotid arteries continued to bleed at intervals for five minutes after death. (' Lancet,' 1871, i.p. 166; ii. p. 210.) The following may be regarded as a summary of the appearances in hanging, when death has really taken place from asphyxia: the countenance is either livid or pale ; the eyes are prominent; the tongue congested and occasionally protruded; the lower jaw retracted; the skin is covered with patches of cadaveric lividity ; the hands are livid and clenched; an oblique mark is found on the neck, sometimes pre- senting traces of ecchymosis; commonly, however, the skin is only brown in colour and hardened; the larynx, windpipe, and subjacent muscles are lacerated, depressed, or discoloured; the vessels of the brain are congested, as well as those of the lungs and the right cavities of the heart; a mucous froth tinged with blood is occasionally found in the windpipe. These appearances will, of course, be modified, or they may be altogether absent, when death has arisen from disorder of the cerebral circulation, or from injury to the spinal marrow, either by great congestion, effusion of blood, fracture, or displacement. Patenko describes intense congestion of the medulla oblongata as an appearance found in death from hanging. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1885, t. 1, p. 209.) Was Death caused ly Hanging f—When a person is found dead and his body is suspended, it may be a question whether death really took place from hanging or not. In investigating a case of this kind, it is necessary to draw a distinction between the external and internal appearances of the body. The former alone can assist us in returning an answer to this question: the internal appearances of the body can


[431/872 b22652516_0431.jp2]

THE MARK OF THE CORD. 419 furnish only the general signs of asphyxia, and enable us to say whether any latent cause of death existed. The Mark of the Cord.—Among the external appearances, it is chiefly to the marh produced by the cord on the neck that medical jurists have looked for the determination of this question. As the form, position, and other characteristics of this mark have been already described, it will now be necessary to allude to it only as furnishing evidence of life at the time of its production. It has been stated that, so far from being constantly hvid or ecchymosed, this condition is in reality not seen in more than one-half of the cases which occur. But admitting that we find ecchymosis in the course of the ligature, are we always to infer that it must have been applied while the person was living? There are numerous cases which show that active hfe is not necessary for the production of ecchymosis in the mark; and from the experiments of Devergie, it would appear that, if a body is hanged immediately or a short time after death, an ecchy- mosed mark may be produced on the neck by the ligature. (Op. cit,, t. 2, p. 408.) If a few hours were suffered to elapse, so that the body had become cold before suspension, no ecchymosis was produced by the hgature. Vrolik found, however, that a slightly livid mark was produced on the neck of a dead body, which had been suspended after the lapse of an hour from the time of death. (Casper, ' Wochenschr.,' Feb. 1838.) Hence this condition of the mark in a body found dead merely indicates, either that the deceased must have been hanged while living, or very soon after death. It would be for a jury to decide between these two assumptions, and to consider why, when a man had really died from any other cause, his body should have been hanged in secrecy immediately after death. (See ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1842, t. 1, p. 134.) The circumstance that an ecchymosed mark may be produced by suspending a recently dead body bears out the statement of Merz- dorflf, that it would be in the highest degree difficult, if not utterly impossible, to determine medically, from an inspection, whether a man had been hanged while living, or whether he had been first suffocated and his body suspended immediately after death. In making this admission, it is proper to bear in mind that that which is difficult to a conscientious medical jurist in confining himself to the medical facts, is often easily decided by a jury from these as well as the general evidence afforded to them. Sometimes, besides ecchymosis, there are abrasions of the skin in the course of the cord, and these are known to have been produced during life by the effusion of blood which accompanies them. Devergie never met with this appearance in the hanging of a dead body, even when the hanging took place immediately after death. The discovery of effused coagula in or about the spinal column would render it probable that the deceased must have been hanged while living. Such marks of violence are, however, rare in cases of hanging, and, when they are found, it might be assumed that the effusion and coagulation of blood had been caused by violence offered to the neck immediately after death; but this assumption may be met by the question already sug-


[432/872 b22652516_0432.jp2]

420 HANGING. SUMMARY OF MEDICAL EVIDENCE. gested—namely, why death by hanging should be simulated in the body of a person Avho is alleged to have died from another cause. With regard to the other, or more common kind of mark in suicidal hanging, it can scarcely be said to furnish any evidence in relation to the question which we are here considering. The depression may be hard and brown, although it does not usually acquire this colour until some hours have elapsed after death; for it appears to depend simply upon a desiccation or drying of that portion of the skin which has been compressed by the ligature. Sometimes the upper and lower borders only of the depression present a faint line of redness or lividity; and it is worthy of remark that, when the ligature presents any knots or irre- gularities, those portions of skin which sustain the greatest compression are white, while those which are uncompressed are found more or less ecchymosed. It is in this manner that the form of a hgature is some- times accurately brought out. It may be remarked of these depres- sions produced by the cord, that the characters which they present are the same, whether the hanging has taken place during life or soon after death—the appearances are similar in the two cases. The experiments performed on dead bodies, by Casper and other observers, show that the ordinary or non-ecchymosed mark caused by hanging during life may be produced by a ligature applied to the neck of a subject within two hours, or at a much longer period, after death ; consequently the presence of this mark on the neck is no criterion whether the hanging took place during life or after death. The changes in the skin beneath the mark are also destitute of any distinctive characters: there is a similar condensation of the cellular membrane whether the hanging has occurred in the living or dead. These changes are the simple result of mechanical compression. Clievers has pointed out a sign of death from hanging which is un- doubtedly of high value. Very commonly in hanging, the head is forced on one side by the cord that suspends the body; and the saliva trickles from one angle of the mouth, from which point it descends on the clothing in a perpendicular direction. This appearance is not pro- duced when the body is suspended after death. (' Med. Jurispr. for India,' p. 397.) Summary of Medical Evidence.—From the foregoing considerations, we draw the conclusion that there is no special or distinctive sign, except the last mentioned, by which the hanging of a living person can be deter- mined from an inspection of the dead body. All the other external marks may be simulated in a dead body, and the internal appearances furnish no characteristic evidence whatever. Still, when the greater number of the signs enumerated are present, and there is no other satisfactory cause to account for death, we have strong reason to pre- sume that the deceased has died from hanging. We must not, how- ever, abandon medical evidence on these occasions, merely because plausible objections may be taken to isolated portions of it. Facts may show that, however valid such objections may be in the abstract, they are wholly inapplicable in the concrete, i.e. to the particular case under investigation. Perhaps the greatest medical difficulties occur in refer-


[433/872 b22652516_0433.jp2]

MEDICAL EVIDENCE. MARKS OF VIOLENCE. 421 ence to cases of suicide, owing to the slight appearances which attend this form of death ; but on these occasions, moral and circumstantial proofs are so generally forthcoming that a medical inspection of the body is scarcely ever deemed necessary by a coroner. Even if a doubt were raised in any particular instance, it is more than pro- bable that circumstantial evidence would furnish data for a decision, and thus satisfactorily make up for the want of strict medico-legal proofs. If when we found a deeply ecchymosed or livid mark around the neck of a dead subject, we said, all other circumstances being equal, that the person had most probably died by hanging, we should not be departing from a proper discharge of our duty; since, although it is medically possible that such a mark may, by a certain amount of skill, be produced after death, yet, as it would be only a murderer who would think of hanging up a recently dead body to simulate suicide, so it is certain that in this case there would be some obvious indications of another kind of violent death about the person. The absence of these, and the presence of ecchymosis in the course of the cord, would leave the question of hanging during life decidedly settled in the affirmative. Some caution should be used in expressing an opinion that hanging had taken place after death, even in cases in which there is no ecchy- mosis in the seat of the ligature; because, while such an opinion would be generally correct, it might in some instances lead to the concealment of the real mode of death. Many facts already adduced) show that numerous cases of hanging during life would be pronounced to be cases of hanging after death, if the mere absence of ecchymosis in, the mark were taken as a criterion. The discovery of marks of violence about the person is not of itself sufficient to rebut the presumption, of death from hanging on these occasions. The violence should at least be of such a nature as to account for the immediate destruction of life, or it can throw no light upon the question whether the person might not have died from hanging, in spite of the marks of maltreatment found upon the dead body. If, in reference to a body found hanging, a medical jurist should assert that death had not taken place from this cause, this would be tantamount to declaring that the deceased must have been murdered, because it is difficult to suppose that any one but a murderer would have a reasonable motive for hanging up a recently dead person. This hanging after death has been frequently carried out with the view of concealing the real mode of death, and of making the act appear to be one of suicide. Marks of Violence on the Hanged.—The presence of marks of violence on the body of a hanged person is important, and therefore a witness should notice accurately their number, situation, extent, and direction. Having satisfied himself that they must have been received during life, he will have to consider the probability of their being of accidental origin or not. These marks of violence are not always to be regarded as furnishing unequivocal proofs of murder; for it is possible that they may have been produced by the person himself before hanging, and, not succeeding in committing suicide by these attempts, he may subse-


[434/872 b22652516_0434.jp2]

HANGING. MARKS OF VIOLENCE ON THE BODY. 422 quently have resolved to accomplisli his purpose by suspending him- self. Let the witness duly reflect on these circumstances before he allows his opinion to imphcate any suspected individual—let him con- sider that a hanged subject may bear the marks of a gunshot-wound, his throat may be cut, his person lacerated or disfigured, and yet, before a suspicion of homicide is allowed to be entertained, it ought to be clearly shown that such injuries could not, by any probability, have been self-inflicted. The importance of observing caution in such a case will be still more manifest when there is no ecchymosis produced bv the cord, and the face does not present the usual appearances of hanging. (See ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1870, t. 2, p. 226.) Marks of violence on a hanged subject may in some instances be fairly ascribed to accident. If the person had precipitated himself w^th any violence from a chair or table in a furnished apartment, he may have fallen against articles of furniture, and thus have caused lacera- tions and bruises, especially on the limbs or body. The rope may have given way, and the person, in falling, have injured himself; but he may afterwards have had resolution enough to suspend himself again. Such an occurrence may be rare; but when the presence of these injuries is made to form the chief ground of accusation against another person, their possibly accidental origin ought not to be lost sight of. The falling of the body on a hard pavement, or against some article of furniture, may produce accidental injuries which might be wrongly assigned to homicidal violence. In a case of suicidal hanging in the gaol of Newgate, there was a copious effusion of blood from injuries produced accidentally after death. In death from asphyxia the blood remains fluid in the body longer than in other cases, so that accidental wounds after death may be attended with comparatively large efiusions. The bleeding post mortem is also favoured by the general congestion of the venous system. (' Ann. d'Hyg.^' 1868, t. 2, p. 218.) Severe injuries may be found on the head of the deceased, and yet these may not be inconsistent with suicidal hanging. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1867, t. 1, p. 164; also t. 1, p. 460.) If we suppose the deceased to have been hanged in a state of in- toxication or stupefaction, medical evidence alone will rarely suffice to determine the question of homicide or suicide. The absence of all marks of violence from the body might actually lull suspicion. It is proper on these occasions to look to the hands of the deceased, since it is with these that a person defends himself; and, unless taken unawares, it is almost certain, if the hanging were homicidal, that there would be traces of violence on these parts. The clothes would be torn and discomposed, and the whole appearance of the deceased would be that of one who had done his utmost to resist a violent murderous attack. There might be some injuries which could not be attributed to accident under the circumstances. Among these we may enumerate fractures, dislocations, deeply penetrating incised and gunshot-wounds. Now the question is—Do these serious injuries necessarily establish homicidal hanging ? The answer must be in the negative: although


[435/872 b22652516_0435.jp2]

ACCIDENTAL, HOMICIDAL, AND SUICIDAL HANGING. 423 when fractures or dislocations exist, there are strong grounds for suspicion. Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1842, t. 1, p. 160.) Suicides frequently make attempts on their lives by various means, as by poison, the use of razors, knives, or pistols, and still retain power to hang themselves. Such cases as these are generally determined by circumstantial evidence. A suicide may attempt to destroy himself with a knife or pistol; he may fail in the attempt, and ultimately hang himself. Any description of wound, provided it be such as to allow of a person surviving a sufficient time, may thus be found on a hanged subject, and yet constitute no proof whatever of murder. If there are circumstances about the wound or injury which show that it could not have been self-inflicted, this, of course, will affect the conclusion; but when such circumstances are not met with, a cautious medical jurist should say, in answer to inquiries respecting the origin of these wounds, that they may have been inflicted either by the deceased himself or by another. The medical facts of the case might be consistent with either view. In one instance of suicidal hanging there were lacerated wounds upon the head, and a handkerchief was found blocking up the mouth. A woman committed suicide, in 1868, under the following circumstances. She fastened a cord to the top of a bed-post, put her head in a noose while kneeling on the bed, and then made a deep wound in her arm with a razor; she closed the razor and put it aside. Becoming faint from loss of blood, she must have fallen forward, and the pressure of the cord on the neck caused death. Of course, if, in any case, the wounds or injuries are of a decidedly mortal nature, and have probably caused death, the pre- sumption of murder is very strong ; for who but a murderer would suspend the dead body of a person so wounded immediately after death ? Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1835, t. 2, p. 410.) Was the Hanging the result of Accident, Homicide, or Suicide ?— Most medical jurists have passed over the subject of accidental hanging. In the sense commonly implied by the term, it is certainly unusual; but, although rare, it is a possible occurrence. Circum- stantial evidence will always suffice for the discrimination of accidental hanging; and we have therefore merely to inquire whether, when the body of a person is found hanging under circumstances which do not allow of the suspicion of accident, the act has been the result of suicide or of homicide. A medical witness must remember that this is strictly a question for the jury. It is not for him to say whether a man has hanged himself or been hanged by others, but merely to state, when required, those medical circumstances which support or rebut one or the other presumption. The jury, under the direction of the judge, will arrive at a conclusion from the whole of the evidence, medical and non-medical. Hanging is a very common form of suicide; and of the persons thus destroyed, four-fifths are males. It has been truly observed that, of all the forms of committing murder, hanging is one of the most difficult, and it is a kind of murder seldom employed. In most cases when a person has been hanged by others, it has been after


[436/872 b22652516_0436.jp2]

HOMICIDAL AND SUICIDAL HANGING. 424 death, in order to avert a suspicion of homicide. Hence the dis- covery of a person hanging affords prima facie evidence of suicide, supposing it to be rendered absolutely certain that death has taken place from this cause. We must, however, admit that a man may be murdered by hanging, and yet the appearances about his body will not afford the smallest evidence of the fact. The circumstances which will justify a medical jurist in making this admission are the following:—First, when the person hanged is feeble, and the assailant a strong, healthy man. Thus a child, a youth, a woman, or a person at any period of life worn out and exhausted by disease or infirmity, may be destroyed by hanging. Second, when the person hanged, although usually strong and vigorous, is at the time in a state of intoxication, stupefied by narcotics, asleep, or exhausted by his attempts to defend himself. Third, in all cases, murder may be committed by hanging, when many are combined against one person. With these exceptions, a practitioner will be correct in deciding, in a suspected case, in favour of the presumption of suieide. Unless the person laboured under stupefaction, intoxication, or great bodily weakness, we must expect to find, in homicidal hanging, marks of violence about the body; for there are few who would allow themselves to be murdered without offering some resistance. Some medical jurists have thought that the mark left by the cord on the neck would serve as a criterion of murder on which we might depend. Thus it has been said, if the mark is circular and situated at the lower part of the neck, it is an unequivocal proof of murder. In suicidal hanging, the mark of the cord is generally oblique, being higher at the back part of the neck, in consequence of the loop formed by it yielding more in this direction than in front. But it is an error to suppose that this want of obliquity in the impression can afford any evidence in favour of the act having been homicidal. Its form will depend in a great degree upon the fact of the body being supported or not, for it is the weight of the body which causes its obliquity; it will also depend on the manner in which the cord is adjusted. A case of suicidal hanging is related by Oi'fiTa, in which the mark of the cord extended horizontally round the neck from behind forwards. (' M^d. L^g.,' torn. 2, p. 376.) The slip-knot of the cord was in front of the neck, and it is obvious that, when the cord is thus adjusted by a suicide, there will be scarcely any obliquity in the depression produced by it. Equally ill founded is the assertion that the existence of two impressions on the neck affords positive proof of homicide. One of these impressions may be at the lower part of the neck, and circular— the other at the upper part, and oblique: it is, therefore, contended that the deceased must have been strangled in the first instance and afterwards hanged. The possibility of a prior attempt being made by a suicide to strangle himself, and thus produce the mark, is not adverted to. * Si Ton observe les deux impressions,' says Mahon, ' I'assassinat est alors parfaitement prouve.' It is fortunate that there are facts on record to oppose to this very positive statement. One of the first cases reported by Esquirol is that of a female lunatic who


[437/872 b22652516_0437.jp2]

CIUCCJMSTANTIAL EVIDENCE. committed suicide by hanging herself, and on whose neck two distinct impressions were seen—the one circular, the other oblique. These appear to have arisen from the cord having been passed twice round the neck, the body being at the same time partially supported. In some instances a presumption of homicidal interference may exist if there are two distinct impressions, but it cannot be admitted that they establish the fact of murder. A woman was found hanging to the branch of a tree, the feet resting on the ground. There were two marks on the neck, one like that of strangling with the same ligature as that by which the body was hanging. Walter concluded that the mark produced by the suspension of the body was the result of post- mortem hanging after murder bv strangulation. (' Vierteljahrsschr. ftir Gerichtl. Med.,' 1867, 1, p. 161.) In the same journal (1871, 2, p. 223), a case is reported by Maschka in which a boy, set. 9, was found hanging. There were on the neck marks of pressure, which at first led the examiners to draw the inference that the boy had been strangled, and afterwards hanged. The reasons for this opinion were not satisfactory, and suicide was admitted to be not only possible, but probable. The injury done to the neck by the cord or ligature can rarely afford any clue to the manner in which hanging took place, unless the circumstances under which the body is found favour the presumption of homicide or suicide. Thus laceration of the muscles and vessels of the neck, rupture of the windpipe and displacement of the larynx, stretching of the ligaments of the spine, and effusion of blood on the sheath of the spinal marrow, may be observed in suicidal as in homicidal hanging. The presumption, however, is obviously in favour of the latter, when these violent injuries are found to be accompanied by fracture or displacement of the vertebrae' of the neck, and the body of the deceased is not corpulent, the hgature by which he is suspended is not of a nature to produce them, and the fall of the body has not been great. A much-disputed question has arisen in medical jurisprudence, whether the vertebrae of the neck can become fractured or displaced in suicidal hanging. Most medical jurists deny the possibility of this accident occurring—the displacement or fracture of these vertebrae being rarely observed, even in criminal executions when the greatest violence has been used by the executioner. The author found no case of suicide on record in which such an injury to the neck had been found. Still, it must be admitted to be possible. Circumstantial Evidence.—In all doubtful instances we should not lose sight of moral and circumstantial evidence. We should ascertain whether the individual had been previously disposed to commit suicide or not: we should observe whether the doors and windows of the apartments had been secured on the inside or on the outside; whether the dress of the deceased is at all torn or discomposed, or his hair dishevelled; whether the attitude of the body is such as to show interference after death; whether there are marks of blood about the body, or the ligature, or in the room; whether the hands are bloody,


[438/872 b22652516_0438.jp2]

426 HANGING. POSITION OF THE BODY. or present marks of wounding or struggling; whether the rope or ligature corresponds to the impression seen around the neck; and lastly, whether the cord is of suflBcient strength to support the weight of the deceased. The strongest evidence of homicide is often found in the attitude and the state of the dress of the dead body; it may or may not indicate interference or change after death, irreconcilable with the supposition of death from suicide or accident. On this point the minutest circumstance may become of considerable importance as medical evidence. When there are indications of violent struggling, the dress may be found disordered, unless it has been smoothed or arranged by the murderer after the death of the deceased. There may, of course, be no evidence of disorder or discomposure of the dress in the case of a female, when the body is freely suspended. These points fall, it is true, more within the province of the oflBcers of justice than of a medical practitioner; but the latter is generally the first who is called to see the deceased, and therefore, unless such facts are noticed by him on his visit, they may remain altogether unknown. The medical opinion of the actual cause of death, however, should be based only on medical facts, but circumstantial evidence has on various occasions assisted in clearing up a doubtful case. Louis states that, on removing the body of a man who was found hanging, the rope was observed to be stained with blood. This simple circumstance led to further investigation, by which it was discovered that the person had been murdered, and his body afterwards suspended. The presence of marks on the neck indicative of strangulation, such as the cord was not likely to have produced, may lead to a suspicion that the hanging followed death. The Position of the Body.—Lastly, it has been contended that the position of the dead body may serve to distinguish suicidal from homicidal hanging. This point was strenuously argued on the in- vestigation which took place relative to the death of the Prince de Conde, in 1830. This case involves two glaring errors in reference to medical evidence in death from hanging: first, that a person cannot die from hanging when the body is in any way supported; second, that in all cases of death from hanging, the mark produced on the neck by the cord or hgature must be discoloured or ecchymosed. If not ecchymosed, it was assumed that death must have taken place from some other cause, and the body have been afterwards suspended for the concealment of crime. It is scarcely necessary to state that these propositions are utterly inconsistent with well-known facts. Since this trial, many cases have been recorded in which death has taken place from hanging, when the feet were in contact with the ground, or the persons were almost sitting or recumbent: they may be regarded as mixed cases of hanging and strangulation. The following case fell within the author's own knowledge. In 1832, a man was found hanging in his room, with his knees bent forwards, and his feet resting upon the floor. He had evidently been dead for some time, since cadaveric rigidity had already commenced. The manner in which this person (a working mechanic) had committed suicide was as follows: he


[439/872 b22652516_0439.jp2]

427 POSITION OF THE BODY. had made a slip-knot with one end of his apron, and, having placed his neck in this, he threw the other end of the apron over the top of the door, and shutting the door behind him, he had succeeded in wedging it in firmly. At the same moment he had probably raised himself on tiptoe, and then allowed himself to fall; in this position he died. The weight of his body had already sufficed to drag down a part of the apron, for it seemed as if it had been much stretched. The deceased was in the position in w^hich the body of the Prince de Conde was found, and the depression produced by the ligature on the neck was, as in that case, nowhere ecchymosed. These facts, so far from being considered to negative suicide, were treated as perfectly in accordance with it. A similar case of suicide occurred in 1872. A lady, who had been for some time suffering from great depression, was found dead, hanging by a long cloth to a closed door, over the top of which she had thrown the other end of the cloth (knotted), and then shut the door upon it. (For a similar case, see Henke's ' Zeitschrift,' 1843, 2, 50.) Casper reports an instance in which a man was charged with the murder of his wife because her body was found hanging in almost an erect position! ('Ger. Leich.-Oeffn.,' vol. 2, p. 92.) (For other cases, with illustrations of the positions of the body, see a paper by Tardieu, * Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1870, t. 1, p. 94.) In a case of suicide at Oxford, in 1876, the body of deceased was found hanging behind the door of his bedroom. His feet touched the ground and his knees were bent. A woman, set. 62, confined in Clerkenwell prison in April, 1878, was soon afterwards found dead in her cell. The body was resting on the ground, suspended from a gas- pipe about four feet high, by a neckerchief round her throat. In 1877, Spenser, a barrister, was found dead in his bedroom under the follow- ing circumstances: he was in a sitting position on the floor, with the bell-pull, attached to the bed-post, tied round his neck. There was no doubt that this was an act of suicide. In another case of suicide, the subject of an inquest in 1878, a man was found dead suspended by a handkerchief to a cupboard door. When standing upright he was as high as the cupboard door, but, after suspending himself, he had drawn up his legs behind him, and had died asphyxiated in this singular position. In 1874, a lunatic who had escaped from his keepers was found hanging in a wood near Highgate to a sapling oak by a pocket-handkerchief. The deceased was in a sitting posture, the tree being bent down by his weight. The reports of eleven cases of suicidal hanging or strangulation gave the following results: in three, the deceased were found nearly recumbent; in four, in a kneeling posture, the body being more or less supported l3y the legs; and in four, the persons were found sitting. In one case the deceased, a prisoner, was found hanging to the iron bar of the window of his prison, which was so low that he was almost in a sitting posture. Remer found that among one hundred and one cases of suicidal hanging, in fourteen the body was either standing or kneeling, and in one instance it was in a sitting posture. Duchesne has pubhshed an account of fifty-eight cases in which the suspension


[440/872 b22652516_0440.jp2]

SUICIDAL HANGING. 428 of the body was partial—the feet or trunk being more or less supported. The reporter drew the conclusion that suicide by hanging is consistent with any posture of the body, even when resting upon the two feet. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1845, t. 2, pp. 141 and 346.) Further evidence need not be adduced to show how unfounded is that popular opinion w^hich would attach the idea of homicidal interference to cases in which a body is loosely suspended, or in which the feet are in contact with any support. We ought rather to consider these facts as removing a suspicion of homicide; for there are probably few murderers who would suspend their victims, either living or dead, without taking care that the suspension was not partial, but complete. Besides, the facts of many of these cases are readily explicable : thus, if the ligature is formed of yielding materials, or if it is only loosely attached, it will yield to the weight of the body after death, and allow the feet to touch the floor, which they might not have done in the first instance. If there is reason to believe that the body has not altered its position after suspension, we must remember the suddenness with which in- sensibihty comes on, and the- rapidity with which death takes place in this form of asphyxia. Under very slight pressure on the windpipe a person is rendered utterly powerless to help himself or to move from his position. (See p. 430, post; also 'Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xliv. p. 85.) In spite of these well-known facts, the most serious mistakes are still liable to be made. A case occurred in France, in 1872, in which a young man was charged with the murder of his brother, and suspend- ing his body after death. The only grounds for this strong medical opinion Avere that there was no deep ecchymosed depression round the neck of the deceased, and the body was found hanging nearly in a sitting posture. These conditions were considered to be inconsistent with death from hanging. The cause of death was ascribed to poison- ing with phosphorus, in consequence of some alkaline phosphates and phosphoric acid being found in the stomach. On this series of medical assumptions and mistakes, the young man, who had accidentally dis- covered his brother hanging, was convicted of murder, and sentenced to the galleys for twenty years. The ignorance displayed by the medical witnesses who gave evidence on this occasion has been fully exposed by Bo^^s de Loury, Chevallier, and Personne. (See ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1873, t. 2, p. 113.) The Limhs secured in Suicidal Hanging.—One or two points are worthy of notice in relation to this medico-legal question. The hands or legs, but more commonly the former, have been found tied in cases of undoubted suicidal hanging ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1832, t. 1, p. 419); and yet it has been gravely debated whether it was possible for a person to tie or bind up his hands, and afterwards hang himself. It is unnecessary to examine the ingenious arguments which have been urged against the possibility of an act of this kind being performed, since they are refuted by well-ascertained facts. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xlv. p. 388; and ' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1851, p. 206.) It has also been a debated question whether corporeal infirmity, or some peculiarity affecting the hands, might not interfere with the


[441/872 b22652516_0441.jp2]

429 STRANGULATION. CAUSE OF DEATH. power of an individual to suspend himself. This question can be decided only by reference to the special circumstances of the case. In the case of the Prince de Conde, it was alleged that he could not have hanged himself, in consequence of a defect in the power of one hand; it was also said that he could not have made the knots in the hand- kerchiefs by which he was suspended. Allegations of this kind appear to have been too hastily made in this and other instances. A deter- mined purpose will often make up for a great degree of corporeal infirmity; and unless we make full allowance for this in suicide, we shall always be exposed to error in drawing our conclusions. Bhndness is no obstacle to this mode of perpetrating suicide ; and in reference to age, suicide by hanging has been perpetrated by a boy of nine, and by a man of ninety-seven years of age. STEANGULATION. CHAPTER 40. CAUSE OF DEATH.—APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH.—WAS DEATH CAUSED BY STRANGULATION, OB WAS THE CONSTRICTION APPLIED TO THE NECK AFTER DEATH?—MARKS OF VIOLENCE.—^ACCIDENTAL, HOMICIDAL, AND SUICIDAL STRANGULATION. Cause of Death. Asphyxia.—Hanging and strangulation are usually treated together, and some medical jurists have admitted no distinction in the meaning of these terms. In hanging, the phenomena of asphyxia take place in consequence of the suspension of the body; while in strangulation, asphyxia may be induced, not only by the constriction produced by a ligature round the neck independently of suspension, but by the simple application of pressure, through the fingers or other- wise, on the windpipe. Tardieu considers that the two modes of death should be kept distinct. The external and internal appearances in some respects differ; and while the proof of death from hanging leads to the strongest presumption of suicide, the proof of death from strangulation is equally presumptive of murder. (' Sur la Pendaison la Strangula- tion et la Suffocation,' p. 151.) This medical jurist defined 'strangula- tion to be an act of violence, in which constriction is applied directly to the neck, either around it or in the fore part, so as to prevent the passage of air, and thereby suddenly suspending respiration and life.' This definition obviously includes hanging, and every person who is hanged may be said to be strangled; but while there is only one method of producing death by hanging, there are various methods of producing death from strangulation. A person may be strangled by the use of a cord, band, or ligature drawn tightly round the neck, or


[442/872 b22652516_0442.jp2]

43© STRANGULATION. POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES. by manual violence to the front of the neck, whereby respiration is prevented. The cause of death is asphyxia. The rapidity with which it takes place will depend on the degree and situation of the pressure, and the completeness with which the act of breathing is obstructed. Faure applied a ligature forcibly and suddenly to the neck of a middle-sized dog. For fifty-five seconds the animal did not appear to suffer; but suddenly became violently agitated, its body stiffened, and it rolled convulsively on the ground. A bloody froth issued from the nostrils and throat, and the animal made frequent and violent efforts to breathe. In three minutes and a half it was dead. In a second experiment, an elastic tube was introduced into the windpipe, which admitted of being gradually closed by pressure. The animal could bear the pressure up to the reduction of one-half of the calibre of the tube ; but beyond this it suffered greatly, and when the pressure was increased convulsions supervened. The dog died, in great suifering, before the tube was completely closed. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1859, t. 1, p. 122.) It is probable that human beings die more quickly than animals, especially from the effects of manual strangulation. A sudden and violent com- pression of the windpipe renders a person powerless to call for assistance and give alarm, and it causes almost immediate insensibility and death without convulsions. When a ligature or bandage is used, the pressure is not so complete, and death takes place more slowly with convulsive movements. The circulation of dark-coloured blood continues for a short interval (about four minutes), as in other cases of asphyxia. Owing to this, the face and lips, in accidental strangulation, have been observed to acquire a dark leaden hue. This arises partly from the arrest of the current of venous blood as the result of compression of the vessels, and partly from the circulation of unaerated blood. There is a fair chance of recovery if the cause of constriction is removed, and air is permitted to have access to the lungs, within a period of five minutes; this is on the assumption that no great mechanical injury has been done to the neck. In the act of strangulation a much greater degree of violence is commonly employed than is necessary to cause death; and hence the marks produced on the neck will be, generally speaking, much more evident than in hanging, where the mere weight of the body is the medium by which the windpipe is compressed. Post-mortem Appearances.—The appearances after death are similar to those of hanging, but the injury done to the parts about the neck is commonly greater. Externally, if much force has been used in pro- ducing the constriction, the windpipe, with the muscles and vessels in the fore part of the neck, may be found cut or lacerated, and the ver- tebrae of the neck may be fractured. The face is commonly livid and swollen, the eyes wide open, prominent, and congested, and the pupils dilated. The tongue is swollen, dark-coloured, and protruded; it is sometimes bitten by the teeth, and a bloody froth escapes from the mouth and nostrils. The principal external signs of strangulation are seen in the marks on the neck, produced either by a cord or manual pressure. Tardieu has described another appearance which might be overlooked. This consists in the presence of numerous small spots of


[443/872 b22652516_0443.jp2]

POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES. ecchymosis upon the skin of the face, neck, and chest, as well as in the conjunctiva or membrane of the eyes. These parts present a dotted redness, which has, however, been met with in other cases besides death from strangulation. Internally, the chief signs are to be looked for in the lungs, which are sometimes congested, and at others normal. Tardieu describes patches of emphysema, and also effusions of blood into the substance of the organs (pulmonary apoplexy), varying in diameter from live-eighths of an inch to an inch and a half, and states that the internal punctiform ecchymoses of suffocation are rare in cases of strangulation. (' De la Strangulation.'). The mark on the neck when a ligature has been used is commonly described as a depression, wide but not deep, and corresponding in its characters to the form and thickness of the ligature and the mode in which it has been secured. Too much importance must not be attached to this supposed correspondence when the ligature is not forthcoming. In a case of accidental strangulation which the author saw in 1864, the mark round the neck presented the appearance which might be expected from the use of a narrow cord. But in this instance a soft silk neckerchief was the means of constriction, and the peculiar narrow- ness of the mark on one side was owing to the great tightness with which it had been drawn. The mark or impression produced by a ligature is generally circular, from the mode in which the pressure is produced. It may be situated at any part of the neck, but it is more commonly below the windpipe. In manual strangulation, the marks of bruising and ecchymosis will generally be in the front of the neck, chiefly about the larynx and below it. In a case of homicidal strangu- lation {Beg. V. Shaw, Liverpool Ass., Nov. 1884), the following were the appearances noted, the strangulation of a woman having been effected by means of the fingers and thumb appHed to the sides of the neck. There was a bruise, with extravasation of blood, immediately beneath the lobule of the left ear; and another, also with extravasation, three quarters of an inch below the lobule of the right ear. Correspond- ing to this latter bruise, a second effusion of blood had taken place into the deeper tissues half an inch beneath the surface. There were other bruises over each eyebrow, at the back of the right wrist, over the knuckle of the left little finger, at the inner side of the left elbow, and at each angle of the mouth. Within the m.outh was a contused and lacerated wound opposite the jagged stump of the canine tooth, and, exactly opposite to this, on the upper lip was a smaller bruise, with extravasation of blood. The tongue was bruised on the right side, as though it had been caught between the teeth. The left lateral upper incisor was loosened, and the tongue and effused blood showed that the wound was recent. The blood generally was dark and fluid. The brain and its membranes were intensely congested. There were no marks of injury to the throat. The lungs were congested, and emphysematous on the surface. The heart contained a quantity of dark fluid blood. The abdominal viscera were not noticeably congested. Urine and faeces had escaped. (' Med. Chron.,' i. p. 677.) The circular direction of a mark produced by the ligature is not an absolute indication that


[444/872 b22652516_0444.jp2]

432 STRANGULATION. EXTERNAL AND strangulation has taken place without suspension of the body, since cases of hanging have occurred in which a circular mark has been observed; and it is possible that some degree of obliquity may occasionally exist in the course of the depression produced by a ligature in strangulation. A medical jurist ought, therefore, to weigh all the facts connected with the position of the body and the nature and direction of the ligature, before he forms an opinion from the appearances presented by the mark on the neck, whether the person has been hanged or not. Greater importance is to be attached to the lividity, ecchymosis, and abrasion of the skin m the course of the ligature, than to the circularity or obliquity of the depression produced by it. In the strangling of a living person by a cord, it is scarcely possible that a murderer can avoid producing on the neck marks of severe injury, and, in the existence of these, we have evidence of the violent manner in which death has taken place. In cases in which great violence has been iised to the neck, blood may escape from the month and nose. It is a matter of popular belief that, if there is no open wound in the body, there can be no bleeding. In Beg. v. Millar (C. C. C, July, 1870), the prisoner was charged with the murder of a Mr. Huelin. One of the circumstances which led to the discovery of the crime was the large amount of blood which had escaped from the mouth and nose as a result of the act of strangulation. The evidence left it clear that the prisoner had murdered Huelin and his housekeeper, and had endeavoured to conceal the dead bodies. He had packed the body of the housekeeper in a box, and requested a carrier to place a cord round it. The man observed that fluid blood was oozing from the box, and that there was a large stain of blood on the floor beneath. On opening the box, the body of the woman was found inside. There was a cord tied tightly round the neck of the deceased, and blood had escaped from the mouth and nose and had run down the side of the box. The deceased had been strangled, and such an amount of force used in the tightening of the cord round the neck, as to lead to a copious effusion of blood from the mouth and nose. In cases of asphyxia, the blood, owing to its liquidity, continues to flow for some time after death from any lacerated wound or blood-vessel. On the other hand, a person may be strangled, and yet the ligature, in consequence of its being soft and yielding, will not cause a per- ceptible depression or ecchymosis—scarcely anything more than a slight depression of the skin. If we except cases of suicide, such a condition must be rare, because assailants usually produce a much more violent constriction of the neck than is necessary to ensure the death of a person. The general lividity of the body, contraction of the fingers, with clenching of the hands and swelling and protrusion of the tongue, are more marked in strangulation than in hanging. A thin mucous froth tinged with blood is occasionally found in the air- passages in both cases. In some instances of violent strangulation, blood has escaped from one or both ears during the act; but this is not a usual appearance. In two well-marked cases in which the author was consulted, the constriction of the neck was carried to a great degree,


[445/872 b22652516_0445.jp2]

433 INTERNAL APPEARANCES. but there was no bleeding from the ears. Geoghegan examined a case of suicidal strangulation in which the constriction had been produced by a ribbon, and the violence applied was sufficient to produce bleeding from one ear; on dissection, this was found to have resulted from a rupture of the membrane of the drum of the ear. There was no froth at the mouth or nostrils, and scarcely any lividity or swelling of the face. It was further observed that the mark on the neck, which was deep, almost disappeared after the removal of the hgature. Wilde met with a case in which rupture of the membrane of the drum of the ear, with effusion of blood, was caused by strangulation. Bleeding from the ears, as a result of rupture of the membrane of the drum, must, however, be regarded as an exceptional appearance. Chevers does not mention it as having been noticed in any one of the numerous cases which he has collected in his Indian experience, although bleeding from the nostrils had been observed. (' Med. Jurispr. for India,' 1856, p. 374.) Without rupture of the membrane of the drum, blood could not issue from the ears, and in order that this membrane should be ruptured, certain conditions not commonly met with are required. The body of a woman who had been homicidally strangled, pre- sented the following appearances: the skin of the head, face, neck, and chest was darker than natural, and discoloured underneath, par- ticularly that of the scalp. The brain was suffused with dark blood, the lungs gorged and of a dark colour, the bowels of a dusky-red colour. The eyes were somewhat protruded and bloodshot, the lips swollen and darker than natural, the tongue slightly protruding be- tween the teeth, and froth issuing from the nostrils. There was a mark of pressure behind the right ear, and other marks on the neck and chest, with discoloration of the muscles. (Chevers's ' Med. Jurispr: for India,' pp. 378, 387.) In a case of suicidal strangulation which occurred at Liverpool in 1863, the body of the deceased was found dead, cold, and rigid, about seven hours after he had been seen alive. The arms were flexed, and the hands raised a little above the breast. Bound the neck, just below the cricoid cartilage, was a strip of the deceased's shirt, which had been used as a ligature : it was tied at the hack of the neck. There was shght ecchymosis in the mark beneath. The skin of the face had a dark-red colour, and was dotted with spots of a deeper red. The conjunctivae were ecchymosed, and some blood had escaped from the nose. The brain was congested, and much fluid effused. The heart was empty; the lungs were deep in colour (con- gested). ('Lancet,' 1863, ii. p. 183. See also Beg. v. Shaw, p. 431, ante.) Many of the cases of strangulation which have presented themselves have been too superficially examined. The most com- plete account of the appearances is that given by Tardieu. It is based on observations made in twenty-eight inspections. (' Sur la Pendaison, la Strangulation et la Suffocation,' p. 164.) The hning membrane of the larynx and windpipe was more or less reddened from congestion; sometimes it was livid or of a dark-red colour. There was a bloody froth extending into the air-tubes. The state of the lungs was variable. Contrary to what is generally alleged to b6 2 F


[446/872 b22652516_0446.jp2]

434 STRANGULATION. STATE OF THE LUNGS characteristic of death by asphyxia, Tardieu found these organs to contain but little blood. Sometimes they were congested, at other times normal. There were ruptures of the superficial air-cells pro- ducing patches of emphysema, which were seen singly or in groups. This condition, which was rarely absent, gave to the surface of the lungs the appearance of being covered with white layers of thin false membrane. When these patches were punctured, air escaped. There was an absence of that condition of the lungs which he observed in death from simple suffocation, namely, dotted ecchymosis on the surface, immediately below the investing membrane (the pleura). Throughout the substance of the lungs, effusions of blood varying in size were, however, generally found, provided an early inspection of the body was made. When some days had clasped, the lungs were found pale or congested, without any ecchymosed or mottled appearance. The ruptured air-cells, with air beneath them, were still visible on the surface. The heart presents no uniform condition; being sometimes quite empty, and at others containing dark fluid blood. The brain is occasionally congested, but more commonly has its natural appear- ance. In one instance, blood was found effused on the brain, but this is unusual. It has also been stated that a congested state of the sexual organs, both in males and females, was one of the appearances connected with strangulation; but this has not been confirmed by careful observers. Tardieu met with nothing to call for notice in this respect in the numerous cases which he examined. The involuntary discharge of faeces, urine, and seminal or prostatic fluid, described as one of the characters of death by hanging, may occur in death from strangulation. No importance can be attached to this as a sign of death from asphyxia in any form. It frequently occurs in sudden and violent death from any cause, and there are many instances of death from asphyxia in which it is not observed. Among the occasional appearances of violent strangulation may be mentioned injury to the windpipe and the muscles of the neck around it. One case in which the rings of the windpipe were split as a result of pressure, was com- municated to the author by Inman. Several instances of laceration and rupture of the windpipe are quoted by Chevers. (Op. cit., pp. 381, 384.) In one instance, the ossified thyroid cartilage had been broken and forced inwards, causing suffocation. In Reg. v. O^Brien (Liver- pool Wint. Ass., 1857), a case of alleged murder by strangulation, the cartilage of the windpipe was broken; and in the case of Pinckard (Northampton Lent Ass., 1852), the windpipe w^as broken longitudinally. In reference to fractures of the larynx, see Casper, ' Klin. Novellen,' 1863, p. 497. In suspected homicidal strangulation, it is always proper to examine the contents of the stomach for narcotic poison. In all cases, the cord or ligature, if forthcoming, should be carefully examined, in order to determine w^hether it bears upon it marks of blood, or whether hair or other substances are adhering to it. A portion of it should be reserved for the purposes of identity. In two instances of homicidal strangulation, the ligatures found round the dead bodies were proved to correspond with portions of the same material found in


[447/872 b22652516_0447.jp2]

AND HEART. INJURY TO THE LARYNX. 435 the possession of the persons who were charged with the murders. In removing the ligature from the neck, the precise mode in which it is tied or secured should be noticed, as this may be a fact of importance in reference to an allegation of suicide. The medico-legal questions relative to strangulation are of the same nature as those which have been already considered in treating of hanging. Thus, in examining the body of a person suspected to have been strangled, we may be required to answer the following questions: — Was death caused hy strangulation, or was the constricting force applied to the neck after death ?—Medical jurists have considered that the internal appearances throw no hght upon this question. This opinion probably arose from the fact that inspections have not been made until some days after death, when the peculiar appearances of strangulation have been merged in those of putrefaction. The state of the lungs, however, may be considered as characteristic. It would be impossible, by the application of a ligature round the neck of a dead body, to produce rupture of the air-cells on the surface of the lungs, and effusions of blood in their substance. The state of the eyes and of the inside of the larynx and windpipe in persons who have been strangled could not be imitated by any constriction of the neck after death: no bloody mucous froth would be found in the windpipe or air-tubes. The external appearances have been considered to furnish more accurate means of distinction. Although the condition of the neck generally yields the strongest evidence, it will be proper to seek for that appearance of dotted redness or ecchymosis in the skin of the face, neck, and chest, described by Tardieu. The state of the eyes, as to their prominence and the congestion of the membranes, as well as the position of the tongue, should also be examined. The ecchymosis about the depression of the neck, when a hgature has been employed, with the accompanying swelling and lividity of the face, are pheno- mena not likely to be simulated in a dead body by the application of any degree of violence. When the constriction is produced within a few minutes after death, an ecchymosed depression may result; but it is improbable that there should be any lividity or swelling of the countenance. Casper found that, when the constricting force was not applied to the neck until six hours after death, a mark indicative of vital strangulation could not be produced. It is doubtful whether it could be produced in the dead body even an hour after death. The period cannot be determined with positive certainty; the results would probably vary, according to the rapidity with which the body had cooled. This question was of importance in the case of Marguerite Dixhlanc, tried (C. C. C, June, 1872) for the murder of her mistress, Madame Riel. The body of deceased was found with marks of violence about the head, sufficient to account for death, and there was a rope tightly drawn round the neck. In the defence it was suggested that the rope had been placed round the neck after death for the purpose of dragging the body to the place where it was found. Another theory was that the prisoner had strangled her mistress with the rope. From the


[448/872 b22652516_0448.jp2]

STRANGULATION. MARKS OF 43^ appearance of the neck, the medical evidence left it doubtful whether the rope had been applied during life or soon after death. If the former, it would have proved a deliberate design to murder. The prisoner received the benefit of the doubt, and, although found guilty, the capital sentence was commuted. It is difficult to conceive under what circumstances an attempt to simulate strangulation in a recently dead body could be made, unless for the purpose of throwing suspicion upon an innocent person con- nected with the deceased. When an individual has been murdered, it is not likely that the murderer would attempt to produce the appear- ances of strangulation on the body after death, under the idea of con- cealing his crime; for strangulation is, in most cases, an actual result of homicide, and is rarely seen as an act of suicide. A rope might, however, be applied, as in Dixblanc's case, for the purpose of drag- ging the body. In the absence of ecchymosis from the neck, it will be difficult to form an opinion, unless from circumstantial evidence; but there may not be an ecchymosed circle; for a person may be strangled by the application of pressure to the windpipe through the medium of the finger-nails, or of any hard or resisting substance. The ecchymosis on the neck in such cases will be in detached spots or patches. In the absence of all marks of violence round the neck, we should be cautious in giving an opinion which may affect the life of an accused person; for it is not probable that homicidal strangulation could be accomplished without the production of some appearances of violence on the skin over the larynx or windpipe. It is doubtful whether strangulation can ever take place without some mark being found on the neck indicative of the means used. The bare possibility of death being caused in this manner, without leaving any appreciable trace of violence, must be admitted; although the admission scarcely applies to those cases which require medico-legal investigation. Suicides and murderers generally employ much more violence than is necessary for the purpose of destruction: hence detection is easy. But if a soft and elastic band were applied to the neck with a gi-adually regulated force, it is possible that a person might die strangled, without any external sign being discovered to indicate the manner of his death. Indian surgeons inform us that the Thugs, and other robbers met with in India, are thus accustomed to destroy their victims with the dexterity of practised murderers. A case involving this question of strangulation without marks of violence on the neck, was tried in France, and from the medical evidence decided in the affirmative. ('Gaz. Med.,' 1846, p. 375.) The medical witness should, however, be prepared to consider whether, in the absence of any mark, death might not have proceeded from another cause, and leave it to the authorities of the law to decide, from circumstances, in favour of or against the prisoner. There is nothing sufficient to justify a medical witness in stating that death has proceeded from strangulation, if there should be no appearance of lividity, ecchymosis, or other violence about the neck or face of the deceased. Congestion in the organs of generation is an appearance


[449/872 b22652516_0449.jp2]

437 VIOLENCE ON THE NECK. •which it would not be safe to take as positive evidence of death from strangulation. The state of the countenance will not warrant the expression of an opinion unless it is accompanied by other well-marked signs of this mode of death; for there are many kinds of death in which the features may become livid and distorted from causes totally unconnected with the application of external violence to the throat. So, again, the eyes and tongue may be protruded as a result of putre- factive changes. Let not a witness, then, lend himself as an instrument for the condemnation of a person against whom nothing but a strong suspicion from circumstances may be raised, and where medical evidence is unable to furnish any distinct and conclusive proofs of death from strangulation. This caution is especially necessary in reference to the inspection of bodies which are in a state of putre- faction. A medical man, already provided with a theory of the cause of death by the discovery of a rope or other means of constriction found near a dead body, may easily arrive at the conclusion that death has taken place from strangulation. The absence of the usual con- firmatory appearances in the body may be ascribed to decomposition, and those caused by decomposition may be set down to strangulation. Where there is obvious mechanical violence to the neck, such as frac- ture of the larynx or windpipe, with laceration of the muscles beneath, a visible depression, such as a cord, a ligature, or manual pressure' would produce, a medical opinion may be fairly given in spite of putrefaction. But when, in a putrefied body, indistinct marks on the neck, or patches of discoloration are relied upon as evidence of homicide, there is great risk of a serious mistake. In cases of alleged strangulation, a question may be put to a medical witness as to how far his opinion as to the cause of death has been influenced by the discovery of a rope or ligature around the neck of the deceased, or in the apartment in which a dead body is found. A medical opinion should rest upon the clear and obvious changes produced on the neck and on the structures below the skin, and not upon the mere presence of a cord or ligature. This might be put round the neck of a dead body, or near to it, for a malicious purpose. The act of strangulation should be, medically, as distinctly provable without the production of the rope, as the act of stabbing without the production of the knife which inflicted the stab. If these principles are not strictly adhered to in practice, policemen will be as competent as medical experts to give evidence of the cause of death in cases of alleged strangulation. It is scarcely necessary to state that all marks of violence on the body of a supposed strangled person should be accurately noted, as the questions respecting them, however slight the marks may be, are material. The witness will be expected to state whether they were inflicted before or after death; if before, whether they were sufficient to account for death, or whether they were such as to be explicable on the supposition of an accidental, suicidal, or homicidal origin. It should be observed whether there exist any morbid changes in either of the three great cavities of the body sufficient to account for death,


[450/872 b22652516_0450.jp2]

SUICIDAL STRANGULATION. 438 as this kind of negative evidence may be essential in the progress of a case. In reference to females, whether children or adults, the surgeon should not neglect to examine the sexual organs, in order to ascertain whether there are any marks of violation. Cases have occurred in which rape has been perpetrated, and strangulation resorted to for the purpose of concealing the crime. Strangulation, like hanging, is occasionally the result of accident, but the occurrence may be looked upon as rare. When the body is not suspended, it is commonly more in the power of a person to assist himself, and escape from the constriction; hence cases of acci- dental strangulation are less frequent than those of accidental hanging. As a general rule, cases in which the constriction of the neck has been produced by some accident present no difficulty to a medical jurist, provided the relations of the body to surrounding objects and the com- pressing force have not been disturbed. Should it happen, however, that the body has been removed from the place in which it was first discovered, or the ligature taken from the neck, we can only establish a presumption of accident from the description given. When a charge of murder is instituted against a person, an attempt is not unfrequently made by counsel for the defence to show the pro- bability that the deceased might have fallen while in a state of intoxi- cation, and have become accidentally strangled, either by a tight cravat or by some foreign substance exerting pressure on the windpipe. If we admit the possibility of an occurrence of this nature, we must not lose sight of the existence of other more probable causes of death, nor should v/e allow our judgment to be swayed as to abandon what is probable for that which is merely possible. Suicidal Strangulation.—This mode of suicide is of rare occurrence, iand, except under particular circumstances, impossible. The possibility of an individual strangling himself was for a long time denied by medical jurists; for it was presumed that, when the force was applied by the hand, all power would be lost as soon as the compression of the windpipe commenced. Physiologically correct, this reasoning is, how- ever, only applicable to those cases in which the windpipe is voluntarily compressed by the fingers. When a person determined on suicide allows the windpipe to be compressed, by leaning with the whole weight of his body on a cord passed round his neck and attached to a fixed point, he may perish in this manner almost as readily as if he had hanged himself; for insensibility and death will soon supervene. In the chapter on Hanging, it was stated that suicides were often found with their bodies in close contact with the ground; and cases are reported in which strangulation was accomplished, in the manner above described, while the suicide was in a sitting or kneehng posture (p. 426). On other occasions, the peculiar disposition or nature of the ligature has enabled a person bent on suicide to strangle himself without much difficulty. An instance is related by Orfila, in which two cravats, that were twisted several times round the neck of the deceased, who was discovered lying on his bed, had effectually served the purpose of self- destruction. ('M^d. Ldg.,' vol. 2, p. 389.) Sometimes strangulation


[451/872 b22652516_0451.jp2]

SUICIDAL STRAKGULATION. 439 has been suicidally effected hj a rough cord passed repeatedly round the neck, and tightened by being pulled with each hand. The number of coils would still cause some pressure to be exerted even when the grasp was relaxed by death. ('Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1851, p. 371.) Other cases are related, in which suicides have succeeded in strangling themselves by tightening the ligature with a stick (ibid., p. 371); or, when the ligature was formed of thick and rough materials, by simply tying it in a knot. In the case of a youth found dead in a field with the handle of a pitchfork passed under the necktie, there were marks of strangulation on the larynx, the eyeballs protruded as well as the tongue, which was livid and marked by the teeth. The brain was full of fluid venous blood. There was no doubt that death had taken place by strangulation, probabl}'' suicidal, as it is difficult to conceive that the handle of the fork could have come by any accident into the position in which it was found. A case occurred in 1875, in which a man was found dead in bed, with his handkerchief tied round his neck and twisted from right to left by means of a razor-strop. There was no doubt that this was a case of suicidal strangulation. Although suicidal strangulation may be effected under unexpected circumstances, yet in a case of murder by strangulation it would not be easy to simulate suicide: it would at any rate require great skill and premeditated contrivance on the part of a murderer so to dispose the body of his victim, or to place it in such a relation to surrounding objects, as to render a suspicion of suicide even probable. Thus, if the cord or ligature should be found loose or detached; if the ecchymosis or mark in the neck should not accurately correspond to the points of greatest pressure; if, moreover, the means of compression were not evident when the body was first discovered and before it had been removed from its situation, there would be fair grounds for presuming that the act was homicidal. In those cases in which strangulation has resulted from a compression of the windpipe by the fingers, and where there are fixed ecchymosed marks indicative of direct manual violence, we have the strongest presumptive evidence of murder; for neither acci- dent nor suicide could be urged as affording a satisfactory explanation of their presence. E. Hofmann met with an instance of this kind in which he rightly concluded, from the deep depressions in the neck of the deceased, attended with abrasion of the cuticle and effusion of blood, as well as from the great injury done to the parts about the larynx and windpipe, that the strangulation was homicidal. (' Vierteljahrsschr. fiir Gerichtl. Med.,' 1873, 2, p. 89.) This case is remarkable for another fact. The assassin had wiped his hand, which must have been stained with blood from the violence used, on a towel which was found concealed, but was subsequently traced to his possession. It was affirmed, in defence, that the blood on the towel was of old date, but the spectroscope showed that it had the characters of recent blood. That this had been used for the purpose stated was proved by the discovery on it of the shreds of epidermis and the fine downy hairs of the deceased, such as would have been removed under violent pressure with the fingers.


[452/872 b22652516_0452.jp2]

HOMICIDAL STRANGULATION. Homicidal Strangulation.—Strangulation occasionally comes before our courts as a question of murder: and when a person has been tried upon a charge of this kind, the circumstances have been commonly so clear as to render the duty of a medical witness one of a simple nature. When the cause of death is contested, or when it is contended in defence that the strangulation is suicidal, a medical witness must be prepared to give his reasons for affirming that the act was one of strangulation, and not done by the deceased himself. He must be prepared to meet and explain the differences between the case under investigation and those reported cases which are admitted to have been suicidal. The attitude of the body, the condition of the dress, the means of strangulation, the presence of marks of violence or of blood on the person of the deceased, on his clothes or the furniture of the room, or on the rope or ligature, are circumstances from which, if observed at the time, important medical inferences may be drawn. As a rule, a criminal who attempts to imitate suicide under such a form of murder must, when the facts are properly investigated, inevitably fail in his object. The assassin either does too little, or he does too much. In one case of murder by strangulation, the woman who perpetrated the crime had been a nurse in an infirmary, and accustomed to lay out dead bodies. After the act of murder, she appears to have carried out, unthinkingly, her professional practice, by smoothing the clothes under the body, placing the legs at full length, the arms out, straight by the side, and the hands open and laid out. Such a condition of the body was quite inexplicable on the supposition of suicide, considering the amount of violence which must have attended the strangulation. In another case, the criminal had attempted to make the death appear like an act of suicide by placing the lower end of the rope near the hand of the deceased; but he selected the left hand, whereas the deceased was right-handed, and he did not leave enough rope free from the neck for either hand to grasp, in order to produce the very violent constriction of the neck which had been caused by the two inner coils. Both of these criminals confessed their crimes before execution. Sometimes the appearance of the mark on the neck will allow us to establish a slight presumption for or against homicide. In homicidal strangulation, from the unnecessary violence used, we may expect to find the skin much ecchymosed, lacerated, or excoriated; and the deep- seated parts, such as the muscles and vessels, as well as the windpipe itself, more or less bruised, lacerated, or extensively injured. Such a degree of violence is not commonly found in cases of suicidal strangula- tion. Fracture of the hyoid bone, larynx, and windpipe generally indicate an amount of violence inconsistent with suicide. In Reg. v, Woodford (Lewes Spring Ass., 1876), a case of alleged murder by strangulation, the medical evidence showed not only the marks of a thumb and fingers, as if the deceased had been seized by the throat, but the hyoid bone was found fractured at a spot corresponding to a mark on the throat. There was no doubt that these were the results of homicidal violence, and the prisoner was convicted. The mark on the neck has sometimes furnished evidence of this mode of death, even


[453/872 b22652516_0453.jp2]

HOMICIDAL STRANGULATION. 441 under circumstances in which it might be supposed all evidence would be destroyed. Schiippel describes a case in which he was able to verify the fact of strangulation after the burning of the body. In 1869, a tire took place in a cottage in which there were at the time a man, his wife, a stepson (set. 10), and a new-born infant. The man escaped with the infant, and said that his wife and stepson had left the house before the fire. This was proved to be a falsehood : their dead bodies were subsequently discovered much burnt. A suspicion of incendiarism and murder arose, and the remains were examined by Schiippel. On the burnt remains of the neck of the boy there was a horizontal mark or depression encircling the greater part of the neck, about a quarter of an inch wide, and presenting a smooth surface, quite distinct from the broken, blistered, and carbonized skin above and below it; and the tongue protruded from the mouth. From this condition of the neck and tongue, Schiippel drew the conclusion that the boy had died from strangulation, and that the ligature had been applied to the neck while the boy was living, and had been burnt with the body. (' Viertel- jahrsschr. fiir Gerichtl. Med.,' 1870, 2, p. 140.) The man was found guilty of the murder of his wife and stepson, and a few days afterwards he committed suicide by hanging himself while in prison. He had set fire to the house after the murder, in order to conceal this double crime. In 1889 a man was convicted of the murder of his wife at Dundee. The prisoner went to the police-station and informed the officer that his wife had hung herself some days before ; but on the police-officer pro- ceeding with him to the house, there was no nail in the wall, nor any mark to show that one had been there to which, as alleged by the prisoner, she could have fixed the cord. The case was clearly one of homicidal strangulation. ('Lancet,' 1889, i. p. 696.) In Reg. v. Lunnum (Warwick Lent Ass., 1873), a woman was charged with the murder of her child, a month old, by strangulation. There were five quite recent marks on the throat, such as would be produced by the pressure of four fingers and a thumb. The prisoner stated that these marks were produced by her a fortnight previously, in trying to get a button out of the child's throat. They were too recent to admit of this explanation, and she was convicted of man- slaughter. In the case of the Countess of Goerlitz {ante^ p. 386), whose body was destroyed by burning, the tongue protruded from the mouth, thus indicating death by strangulation. In another case some of the appearances of strangulation were found in spite of the subsequent burning of the body. It is proper to notice in this place the occurrence of what are called ' Garrote rohheries.^ The system of murder normally pursued by the Thugs in India appears to have been imported into England, and many lives have been destroyed by the employment of strangulation for the purposes of robbery. The rigorous proof required of facts which under these assaults can rarely admit of proof, confers impunity on the assailants. The attack is made during darkness; the person is seized by the windpipe from behind, or a bandage is thrown around his neck; and


[454/872 b22652516_0454.jp2]

STRANGULATION. MARKS OF 442 this is sudden]}'' tightened, while accomplices are engaged in perpetrat- ing robbery. The nature of the assault, by pressure on the windpipe, renders it impossible to give an alarm or call for assistance. The person assaulted, if he should recover, is seldom able to identify an assailant: he is attacked from behind, is rendered immediately un- conscious and powerless, and can rarely offer resistance. Recovery or death in such cases depends on the lapse of a few seconds, more or less, during which the constriction of the neck is continued; on the degree of constriction ; and on the age, sex, and strength of the constitution of the person assaulted. An attempt at strangulation, as in garroting, besides inflicting serious local injury to the windpipe and other parts near to it, may cause a state of insensibility which may continue for some hours. There is severe pain in the throat, with difficulty of speaking and swallowing, and if the larynx be seriously injured there may be loss of voice. Dumbness, however, is not one of the secondary symptoms, and loss of voice is usually only temporary during the pressure. By 24 and 25 Vict., c. 100, s. 14, it is enacted, inter alia, that 'whosoever shall attempt to drown, suffocate, or strangle any person, with intent to commit murder^ shall, whether any bodily injury be effected or not, be guilty of felony; and being convicted thereof shall be hable, at the discretion of the court, to be kept in penal servitude for life, or for any term not less than three years, . . . or to be imprisoned for any term not exceeding two years.' As the intent in these cases is to perpetrate rohhery, and not murder, another section (21) has been framed, for the prevention of the crime of garrot- ing : ' Whosoever shall, by any means whatsoever, attempt to choke, suffocate, or strangle any other person, or shall, by any means calcu- lated to choke, suffocate, or strangle, attempt to render any other person insensible, unconscious, or incapable of resistance, with intent, in any of such cases, to enable himself, or any other person, to commit, or with intent in any of such cases thereby to assist any other person in committing any indictable offence, shall be guilty of felony ; and being convicted thereof shall be liable, at the discretion of the court, to be kept in penal servitude for life, or for any term not less than five years, ... or to be imprisoned for any term not exceeding two years,' etc. Marks of Violence.—It may be inquired whether marks of violence on the body, or blood-stains on the clothes, furniture, or in the apart- ment, do not afford-strong evidence of homicidal strangulation. The answer is—if the marks of violence are such that they could not pos- sibly have arisen from any accident before death, or that they could not possibly have been self-inflicted, they afford the strongest evidence of murder. But the cases wherein so positive an answer can be returned are exceptional. It is not always in our power to distinguish accidental or self-inflicted from homicidal violence ; and we are always bound to look to the probability of accident or of previous attempts at suicide being the source of those injuries which may be apparent on a strangled body. There may be several marks on the neck, but then the person may have tried to strangle himself more than once. The


[455/872 b22652516_0455.jp2]

TiaLENCE ON THE BODY. 443 throat may be cut; there may be a deep-seated stab or gunshot-wound, involving some of the important organs of the body; or poison may be found in the stomach ; but in a purely medical point of view, how are we to know that the deceased did not actually make the marks, inflict the wounds, or take the poison before he succeeded in strangling him- self? In the chapters on Drowning and Hanging, we have seen what suicides can do when they are desperately bent on destroying them- selves. Wounds and personal injuries often create serious difficulties to a medical jurist, which it requires the greatest caution and prudence on his part to meet and explain. The prejudice of the pubhc mind is such, that the discovery of a strangled person, with any marks of personal injury, or of poisoning in his stomach, would, in most cases, lead to a charge of murder, unless the facts rendered it clearly im- possible that any attempt could have been made on his life. It is against this prejudice that a medical witness must strenuously guard himself; he may be abused for not joining in the outcry of the vulgar, but the best recompense for this abuse will be the conviction that he is interposing the shield of science to protect a possibly innocent fellow-creature from the senseless denunciations of ignorance. Further, before a charge of murder by strangulation is raised against any person from marks or appearances found on a dead body, care should be taken that they admit of no other reasonable explanation than the direct application of violence. Even if marks indicative of strangulation are discovered, the question arises whether they may not have been pro- duced by the deceased upon himself in an attempt at suicide which may have failed. If the body of a person is allowed to cool, with a handkerchief, band, or tightly fitting collar round the neck, a mark resembling that of strangulation will be produced. Before any opinion is given that murder has been perpetrated or attempted, the medical proofs on which rehance is placed should be clear, distinct, conclusive, and satisfactory. In the dead bodies of infants and children, in whom the neck is short, a mark is occasionally seen which arises from the bending of the head; and in short-necked persons a similar mark or depression has been noticed after death, in front of the neck. This mark may also be produced by the pressure of a cap-string. These marks are then rendered more prominent by their assuming a livid appearance. They might, at first, be mistaken for marks produced by a ligature in an attempted strangulation. In one case a death from apoplexy was attributed to homicidal strangulation from a cadaveric change of this kind. ('Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1859, t. 1, p. 139, and t. 26, p. 149.) The matter was set right by Ollivier. In 1888, a supposed murder occurred in Whitechapel, from a drunken woman having died from the accidental pressure of a bonnet string on her throat. Homicidal strangulation may be perpetrated on the weak and infirm without causing any noise or creating alarm. In the first place, if the throat is at once seized and firmly compressed, no cry can be made, nor any noise produced to excite the attention of those who are near. An aged woman was strangled in her shop by an apprentice in so short a time and so


[456/872 b22652516_0456.jp2]

STRANGULATION. MARKS OF VIOLENCE 444 quietly, that her husband, who was only separated from her by a slight partition, heard no noise or disturbance during this act of murder. Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1859, t. 1, p. 157.) It cannot be disputed that, in contested questions of suicidal or homicidal strangulation, rare as they are, we must be often greatly indebted to evidence founded on circumstances, as well as to moral presumptions. How far a medical jurist may be allowed to make use of these in the formation of an opinion, it will be for the court to determine. Generally speaking, his duty is rigorously confined to the furnishing of medical evidence from medical data alone; but instances present themselves in which this rule must be departed from, or the course of justice will be impeded. Besides, there are numerous cir- cumstances of a collateral nature which may materially modify a medical opinion. Thus the sight of a ligature, the state of the dress, and the attitude of the deceased when discovered, although not strictly medical circumstances, bear directly upon medical opinions; and that evidence ought not to be objected to which is partly founded upon facts of this nature. It must occur to all that, without circum- stantial evidence, the best medical opinion in these cases will often amount to nothing. It may be, for example, no more than this: the case is either one of homicide or suicide ; and why is such an indefinite answer to be returned ? Because, in the abstract view of strangulation, it is not easy to determine whether a ligature was suicidally appHed round the neck or not. The appearances may be in many cases the same, and, where they are different, this difference may be due to acci- dent, so that it is a mistake to suppose that we must look to medical circumstances alone for clearing up this intricate question. On some occasions the theory of homicide or suicide will be equally consistent wath the facts. The cases of Dr. Franch and his son, which occurred at Brighton in 1855, were of this ambiguous character. Whether the son strangled himself, or was strangled by his father, was a question which could not be satisfactorily solved by medical, moral, or circum- stantial evidence. Unfortunately, the bodies did not undergo a proper medico-legal inspection. In all fatal cases resulting from acts of suicide, the means by which strangulation was produced will be found upon the neck. The con- dition of the mark on the neck, the course and direction of the cord, the mode in which it was secured or fixed in order to produce effective pressure on the windpipe, the amount of injury to the muscles and parts beneath, are circumstances from which, if observed at the time, a correct medical opinion may generally be formed. If the means of constriction are removed, or the cord or ligature is loosely applied, these facts, unless explained, are presumptive of homicidal interference. There is another condition in which a presumption of homicide will be justifiable. A man, in strangling himself, is not likely to vary the means. The act is commonly due to a sudden impulse, if we may judge from the moral proofs afforded in the instances on record. The article which is nearest to the suicide is seized, and made the instru- ment of self-destruction. It has already been stated as doubtful


[457/872 b22652516_0457.jp2]

IMPUTED STRANGULATION. 445- whether a person could strangle himself by the mere application of the fingers to the windpipe ; the discovery of such marks only as would indicate this kind of strangulation, therefore, renders suicide in the highest degree improbable. But these marks may be sometimes ascribed to the deceased having fallen with his hand possibly applied to his neck, and the inference will be drawn that they have accidentally resulted from the pressure of his own fingers. This is an improbable mode of accounting for the production of ecchymosis or excoriation of the skin in front of the neck. If, besides these marks of fingers, we find a circular mark, with a ligature still around the neck, the presumption of murder becomes very strong. It may be said that a person might at first try to strangle himself with his fingers, and, not succeeding, might afterwards employ a cord. But the degree in which the coincidental impressions exist will in general remove this objection. Imputed Strangulation.—Hitherto the subject of strangulation has been considered in reference to the dead. But a living person may charge another with attempting murder under such circumstances, and here a medical jurist will have the not very arduous duty of detecting and exposing the imposture. It has been considered so improbable that any one would seriously attempt to strangle himself, and then impute the act to another, that medical jurists have given but little attention to this subject. A case tried in France in 1864 {Affaire Armand et Maurice Boux), has shown the great importance of it, and how easily medical men and the public may be deceived by a plausible story (p. 446, ^osi). As in reference to imputed wounds, so in these cases impostors rarely produce such injury to themselves as to place their lives in jeopardy. The cord is loose round the neck, or there would be speedy death; it is not so secured as to press with great force on the air-passages, to cause the tongue to protrude, or to produce lividity of the face and neck, or ecchymosis in the conjunctivae and the skin. It is either a ligature or a rope which is used by the impostor: he does not commonly resort to manual violence to his throat. The marked features of a really homicidal attempt is in the great amount of violence done to the neck; and the account given by the impostor will be inconsistent in its details, and not reconcilable with the ordinary effects of homicidal strangulation. Tardieu met with a case, in which a young woman of good social position, wishing to excite public sympathy, alleged that she had been made the victim of a pohtical conspiracy. One evening she was found at the door of her room apparently in a very alarming state : she could not speak, but indicated, partly by gestures and partly by writing, that as she was entering her room a man had attempted to strangle her by pressing his hand upon her neck, and at the same time had stabbed her in the chest with a dagger. On close examination, it was found that there were two stabs which had penetrated only through the outer clothing. But the most singular effect of the alleged attempt at strangulation was that, instead of producing a difficulty of speaking and alteration of the voice, it had been followed by complete dumb- ness. Tardieu could find on the neck no trace of any attempt at


[458/872 b22652516_0458.jp2]

446 FALSE CHARGES OF STRANGULATION", SUFFOCATION. strangulation; and on assuring the young lady that the loss of voice under such circumstances could not last for more than a minute, she at once admitted that there was no foundation for the charge. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1859, t. 1, p. 163.) On this occasion no person was accused; but the case is different when, for the purpose of extortion or other base motives, one or more persons are charged with an attempt at murder. A flagrant instance of this kind occurred in France, in which a wealthy merchant of Montpellier was charged by his servant, Maurice Boux, with having attempted to murder him by strangula- tion. The case was tried in March, 1864, before the Court of Assizes of the Bouches du Khone ; and, fortunately for the interests of justice, as well as for the credit of medico-legal science in France, it ended in an acquittal of the accused. {Affaire Armand et Maurice Roux^ Paris, 1864; ' Kelat. Med.-Leg. de I'Affaire Armand,' etc., par Tardieu; ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1864, t. 1. p. 415.) It may be observed, in reference to these imputed eases, that men who deliberately strangle others either draw a cord tightly, or secure it by a knot. The pressure to the neck is not so gentle as to leave no mark whatever, or to allow the strangled person to breathe and watch all that goes on around him. Slight marks of violence about the neck should be therefore viewed on these occasions with suspicion. If, as is most improbable in attempted homicide, the cord is left only loosely coiled around the neck, the person assaulted necessarily retains the power of breathing and calling for assistance ; but if the hand of a murderer has been at work, it is effectually tightened, and the person dies in a few minutes. A charge of this kind, where there can be no witness but the person making it, requires to be supported, not by medical probabilities, but by the strongest medical facts. These ought to show that there are marks of violence on the neck such as an assassin would be likely to inflict, and, at the same time, such as the person making the charge would not be likely to produce, or have the power of producing, on himself. SUFFOCATION. CHAPTER 41. SUFFOCATION FROM MECHANICAL CAUSES.—CAUSE OF DEATH.—APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH.—EVIDENCE OF DEATH FROM SUFFOCATION.—ACCIDENTAL, SUICIDAL, AND HOMICIDAL SUFFOCATION.—SMOTHERING. By suffocation we are to understand that condition in which air is prevented from penetrating into the lungs, not by constriction of the


[459/872 b22652516_0459.jp2]

DEATH FROM SUFFOCATION. 447 windpipe, but by some mechanical cause operating on the mouth externally, or on the throat, windpipe, or air-passages internall3^ In this sense it will be perceived that drowning is one form of death from suffocation, the water being an effectual medium for preventing access of air to the lungs. The term ' suffocation' is applied to various conditions in which the symptoms and effects differ. There may be a simple privation of air; the air respired may not be renewed from the want of proper venti- lation ; or the air which is breathed may be mixed with certain noxious gases or vapours, which, by absorption into the blood through the air-cells of the lungs, may destroy life liiie poisons. The symptoms preceding death, the disposition to recovery, and the post-mortem appearances in fatal cases, will differ under these circumstances. It will be sufficient at present to consider the most simple form of suffo- cation which is within the reach of experiment, namely, that which depends on the privation of air by substances blocking up the air- passages, or by the covering of the mouth and nostrils. A committee of the Medico-Cliirurgical Society performed a series of experiments on dogs, in which a tube was inserted into the windpipe, and breathing either took place or was completely arrested, according to whether the tube was kept open or closed by an accurately fitting plug. When the tube was closed, the animal, after a variable number of seconds, made strong efforts to breathe; and when these ceased, unless air was speedily admitted, it died. From nine experiments on the dog, the average duration of the respiratory movements, after the animal had been completely deprived of air, was four minutes and five seconds. The average duration of the heart's action was seven minutes and eleven seconds; and it further appeared that, on an average, the heart's action continued for three minutes and fifteen seconds after the animal had ceased to make these efforts to breathe. In respect to the rapidity with which death takes place in animals, the following conclusions were drawn: first, a dog may be deprived of air during a period of three minutes and fifty seconds, and afterwards recover without the application of artificial means ; and second, a dog is unlikely to recover, if left to itself, after having been deprived of air during a period of four minutes and ten. seconds. As in drowning, the shorter the interval between the last respiratory efforts and the readmission of air, the greater the probability of recovery. (' Med.-Chir. Trans.,' 1862, vol. 45, p. 454.) The results of these experiments in reference to the dura- tion of life under privation of air may be considered applicable to a human being. It is not likely that a man would survive under these circumstances longer than a dog, and it may therefore be fairly inferred that the life of a man would be destroyed in from four to five minutes after the power of breathing had been completely arrested. There are many varieties of death by suffocation, all of which are of great medico-legal interest:—1. The close application of the hand over the mouth and nostrils, or the placing of a plaster or cloth over these parts, combined with pressure on the chest: this was formerly not an unfrequent form of homicidal suffocation. 2. Smothering, or


[460/872 b22652516_0460.jp2]

SUFFOCATION. TIME OF DEATH. 448 the covering of the head and face with articles of clothing, etc., which effectually prevent breathing. 3. The accidental or forcible introduc- tion of foreign bodies into the mouth and throat. 4. The flow of blood into the windpipe from a severe wound in the throat, or from the bursting of a blood-vessel or aneurismal sac. 5. In wounds of the throat, when the windpipe is completely divided, the lower end may be so drawn into the wound as to produce a closure of the orifice, and intercept the passage of air. One or other of these causes frequently operates to render a wound in the throat fatal. 6. The plunging of the face into mud, snow, dust, ashes, feathers, leaves, or similar substances. In all these cases death takes place from asphyxia, and with great rapidity, if the chest sustains at the same time any degree of forcible compression. 7. Swelling or spasm of the glottis produced by the contact of corrosive liquids or boiling water. In one case death was probably caused by the apphcation ©f a strong solution of nitrate of mercury to an ulcer in the throat. Suffocation may arise from morbid causes operating mechanically to prevent respiration, such as a diseased state of the parts about the throat, an enlargement of the glands, the bursting of a tonsillary abscess, or the effusion of lymph, blood, or pus into the windpipe, or about the opening of the larynx (rima glottidis). Any of these causes may suddenly arrest the act of breathing—a fact which can only be determined by a careful examination of the air-passages. Acci- dental suffocation may arise from large masses of food blocking up the larynx. If the glottis (the opening of the windpipe) be completely closed by food, death may take place suddenly; although the person so situated may be capable of making some exertion or of moving from the spot. Mackenzie relates a case in which a man was suddenly choked by swallowing a large piece of meat: he immediately walked across the street to a chemist's shop, and, soon after entering it, he fell down in a state of insensibility. After death, the throat was found to be filled with a piece of beef, which rested on the glottis, and had pressed the epiglottis forward. Part of the mass had entered the wind- pipe through the rima glottidis, and had thus caused death by suffoca- tion. It is probable that, in this and similar cases, the foreign body does not so completely close the aperture as to prevent some degree of respiration, but, the blood being imperfectly aerated, asphyxia is speedily induced. ('Edin. Month. Jour.,'July, 1851, p. 68.) A man, set. 31, was put to bed drunk, having previously vomited; and shortly after- wards he was found dead. On inspection, Jackson discovered the usual appearances of asphyxia, i.e. congestion of the lungs and of the right cavities of the heart. He was thus led to examine the air- passages carefully, and he found lying over the upper opening of the larynx (rima glottidis) a thin and transparent piece of potato-skin so closely applied to the fissure as to prevent breathing. The man had died accidentally suffocated from this mechanical cause. He had had potatoes for dinner the day before ; the piece of skin had probably been thrown up at the time of vomiting, and had been drawn back by inspiration into the singular position in which it was found. Owing


[461/872 b22652516_0461.jp2]

449 SUFFOCATION FROM ACCIDENT OR DISEASE. to intoxication, the deceased was unable to cough it up. (' Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' April, 1844, p. 390.) Wright describes the case of an old woman who, during a violent fit of coughing, suddenly fell back in her bed, struggled convulsively, and died in a few seconds. After death, a pellet of tough mucus was found in the rima glottidis, so that the deceased was hterally suffocated with her own phlegm. (' Pathol. Eesearches,' 1850, p. 7.) A man was suffocated while at dinner by swallowing his artificial teeth. In another case, a man died from suffocation by swallowing an oyster. In the case of a child, set. 8, it was proved that suffocation had been caused by a gooseberry which had been swallowed, blocking up the glottis. In the ' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xxix, p. 146, there is a case reported in which a child was suffocated by a pea. A person may die suffocated, not from the act of swallowing food, but by reason of part of the contents of the stomach finding their way into the air-passages. Whenever vomiting is followed by an inspiration while the vomited matters are in the mouth, the food is liable to be drawn by aspiration into the windpipe, bronchi, and pulmonary cells, and to cause suffocation. Pressure on the body may have the same effect as the act of vomiting. A man was struck several blows with the fist; he was then stabbed in the nape of the neck, and finally his body was trampled on by his assailants. He died before any assist- ance could be rendered. On inspection, the air-passages were found to contain a large quantity of pulpy matter such as existed in the stomach. The wounds received were only flesh wounds, no large blood-vessel having been injured. Nevertheless, one expert attributed death to loss of blood from the wounds; another assigned it to asphyxia from the food vomited by the deceased passing into the lungs during an inspira- tion. Engel and Hauska were able to prove that asphyxia was the cause of death, and that the assailants were responsible. The food had been forced into the fauces by the act of trampling on the body. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1868, t. 1, 450; t. 2, 226; and 1869, t. 1, 471.) This mode of death by suffocation, as a result of violence to the abdomen, is probably more frequent than it is commonly supposed to be. It is likely to occur in the maltreatment of drunken persons. In 1889 man was convicted of the murder of a woman, Seli»a Troughear {Beg. I V. Kerr, Carlisle Sum. Ass. 1889). From the evidence it appeared that the woman died whilst, or shortly after, a rape was committed on her by the prisoner, accompanied with brutal violence. The actual cause of death was suffocation brought about by the vomiting of a hearty meal. In connection with this case I am indebted to a distinguished Queen's Counsel for the following legal memorandum. If a man in committing a rape on a woman, or in assaulting her to cause grievous bodily harm, causes her to vomit, whereby she is suffocated, he commits an act of constructive murder ; but if the vomiting and death were the result of an attempt only at rape, he is guilty of manslaughter. If, on the other hand, the woman consented to have carnal intercourse, and all that the man did to her was the rude violence of a rough drunken man without intent to injure, he would have committed no offence


[462/872 b22652516_0462.jp2]

450 SUFFOCATION FROM ACCIDENT OR DISEASE. whatever, even though what he did caused her to vomit, and thus led to her death from suffocation. Behrend has reported a case in which suffocation was caused by the aspiration of food, with a full account of the post-mortem appearances, in Horn's ' Vierteljahrsschrift,' 1868, 1, 123. Accidental suffocation from food is one of those causes of violent death which is recorded in the Registrar-General's returns. It appears from the report of mortality in England and Wales that in one year there were 81 deaths from this cause. A person has been wrongly charged with causing the death of another, when the cause was really owing to the impaction of food in the larynx. An instance of this kind occurred at Hillingdon (' Lan- cet,' 1850, i. p. 313). The deceased had a quarrel with the accused, and they were seen to fall to the ground together, while struggling and fighting. They were separated. About two hours afterwards, the deceased, who appeared quite well, was observed to rise from the dinner-table and leave the room. He was found leaning against the cottage, as if in a falling position, and he expired in two or three minutes. The person with whom the deceased had been fighting was charged with manslaughter before a magistrate. At the inquest, the medical witness stated he found the organs of the body, excepting the brain, in a very healthy state. The brain was excessively congested, and he attributed death to apoplexy. The coroner desired the witness to examine the mouth and throat (which he had omitted to do at the inspection), as, from the suddenness of death after eating, he (the coroner) thought the man might have been choked. This opinion turned out to be correct. A large piece of meat was found wedged in the opening of the throat: this had caused death by suffocation. It had not completely closed the air-passages in the first instance : hence the man was able to move from the dinner-table. The person accused of manslaughter was discharged. A medical jurist, however, must not lose sight of the fact that a foreign substance may be homicidally impacted in the larynx, and that, except by a careful examination of the body, death may be wrongly assigned to accident. A case reported by Littlejohn is in this respect instructive. In examining the body of a woman who it was stated had died suddenly, he found a quart-bottle ,pork inserted tightly into the upper part of the larynx. The sealed end was uppermost, and was roughened by the passage of the screw. Fractures of the ribs were found, and it was quite clear that deceased had not died a natural death. It was suggested that the deceased, while extracting the cork from the bottle with her teeth, might, by the sudden impetus of the contained fluids, have drawn it into the position in which it was found. But this theory was negatived by the sealed end of the cork being uppermost in the throat, as well as by the structure of the parts. The medical opinion was that the cork must have been forcibly placed there b}'' another person, while the woman was in a helpless state of intoxication. There was no reason to doubt that this was a deliberate act of murder. Five persons were present Avith the deceased at the time of her death, but it was impossible to fix with certainty upon the person who had committed the act, and the


[463/872 b22652516_0463.jp2]

CAUSE OF DEATH. POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES. 451 man on whom the strongest suspicion fell was acquitted on a verdict of ' not proven.' (' Edin. Med. Jour./ Dec. 1855, p. 511; and for a report of the trial, see p. 540.) Cause of Death.—In suffocation, death takes place from asphyxia; and this occurs with a rapidity proportioned to the degree of impedi- ment existing to the passage of the air. There does not seem to be any reason to attribute death to apoplexy. The congestion of the cerebral vessels may be regarded as a consequence of the disturbance of the functions of the lungs. If the veins of the neck were opened, so as to prevent an accumulation of blood in the vessels of the brain, it is pretty certain that the prevention of respiration would destroy life under the same circumstances and within the same period of time; therefore we may regard death from suffocation as resulting from pure asphyxia. In treating a case of suffocation, we have simply to allow of the renewal of air by removing, if this be possible, the mechanical obstacle to respiration. The results of experiments on dogs already cited (see p. 447) show that, even with a perfect closure of the wind- pipe, an animal may recover spontaneously after nearly four minutes' deprivation of air. In hanging and strangulation, there is sometimes great violence done to the parts about the neck. In suffocation, these accidental obstacles to recovery do not exist, and the surgeon has simply to readmit the air into the lungs. All experiments go to show that, even in this form of asphyxia, which is most favourable for recovery, the complete suspension of respiration for^?;e minutes is fatal. Hang- ing and strangulation prove fatal from asphyxia within the same period of time, and drowning within a shorter period. Vierordt has shown that the spectroscope will enable a skilful observer to note the time at which life has passed into death, and whether there is a probability that life can be restored after a certain interval. If the fourth and fifth fingers are placed one over the other in a living body, and the line of union is brought before the slit of a spectroscope against the sunlight, or a very powerful hght, the two absorption-bands of oxy-hsemoglobin will be visible (p. 272). In the body of one really dead, whether from asphyxia by suffocation or any other cause, only one band, that of deoxidized haemoglobin, will be seen. Vierordt found that, even in the living body, by a compression of the fingers, local death by the withdrawal of oxygen takes place rapidly, and the two bands pass into one. On removing the temporary pressure, the oxygenated blood again circulates, and the two bands are restored. Post-mortem Appearances.—There are rarely any considerable marks of violence externally. When the body has become perfectly cold, there may be patches of lividity diffused over the skin; but these are not always present. Tardieu has found upon the skin of the neck, face, and shoulders, dotted or punctiform ecchymoses. (' La Pendaison, la Strangulation, et la Suffocation,' p. 267.) The lips are livid; the skin of the face and neck may be pale or present a dusky-violet tint, with small patches of ecchymosis. The eyes are congested; there is a mucous froth about the lips and mouth. The mouth, throat, and


[464/872 b22652516_0464.jp2]

452 SUFFOCATION. POST-MORTEM ArPEARANCES. parts about the windpipe sliould be carefully examined for foreign substances. Internally, the lungs and right cavities of the heart may be found distended with blood. The state of the lungs and heart is, however, subject to variation. The lungs are not necessarily found congested ; and sometimes, as in a case referred to the author in 1864, one lung may be found congested and the other not. In 1883, a terrible catastrophe occurred in Sunderland, whereby about two hun- dred children lost their hves by suffocation. By the closing of a door, the children, pouring down a staircase, trampled one another to death, their bodies being heaped upon one another to a height of several feet. The same characteristic appearances were observed in nearly every case, namely, a congested, puffy face, purple or blackish turgescence of the vessels of the neck, closed eyelids, protruding and fixed eyeballs, pupils dilated to the utmost, bloody froth issuing from the nose and mouth, giving the appearance of an intense degree of suff"ering and anxiety ; yet in twenty-four hours after death, much of this passed off", and the face exhibited a slight smile, as if in sleep. (' Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1883, i. p. 1248.) Tardieu states, from his observations, that the lungs are of a reddish colour, sometimes pale, and not distended, and presenting occasionally only a slight degree of congestion at the base and posteriorly. A special character which he states he has invariably noticed in these organs consists in the presence of small ecchymosed spots or patches beneath the pleura or investing membrane. He describes these spots as of a dark colour, and var3dng in size from a pin's head to a lentil. In the adult they are of still larger size. Their number is variable; sometimes five or six may be found, at others twenty or thirty, and in other cases the surface of the lung may be so studded with them as to give to it a granite-like appearance. These spots of ecchymosis are sometimes agglomerated, at other times separated, but their outline is generally distinct and well defined on the surface of the lungs. They are most frequently seen at the root of the lungs, at their bases, and about their lower margin. They are owing to small effiisions of blood from ruptured vessels, like true ecchj^mosis. They may be distinguished so long as the tissue of the lungs remains unchanged. Tardieu states that he has seen these subpleural ecchy- raoses in the lungs of an infant which had been ly'mg ten months in the soil of a privy. He admits, however, that they may also be found in the lungs of children that have not breathed; hence no inference of death from suffocation should be drawn from this appearance in the lungs, unless they have actually received air. In three instances he met with subpleural ecchymoses in lungs which sank in water, and had all the usual characters of these organs in a foetal state. The children had been born living, prematurely, and under conditions in which life by respiration could not be perfectly established: one of them had made several cries without effectually receiving air into the lungs. (See Casper's ' Klin. Novellen,' 1863, p. 471.) This struggle to breathe may have produced the appearance resembling that of suffocation. In new-born children dying from suffocation, the thymus gland has been found in a similar condition. The same appearance may be produced


[465/872 b22652516_0465.jp2]

STATE OF THE LUNGS. 453 •during the birth of a child by pressure on the navel string, when this is prolapsed whilst the head of the child is passing down the vagina. The value of medical evidence derivable from the presence of subpleural ecchymoses in the lungs has been also investigated by Legroux. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1878, t. 2, pp. 174 and 335.) He behoves: 1. That they may be seen in the lungs under various conditions, indepondently of the cause of death. 2. They are met with in different degrees in the different forms of death by asphyxia. 3. Unless accompanied by other indications of the mode of death, their presence will not enable us to determine the cause. In death from suffocation they are very numerous, from strangulation less numerous, and from hanging least numerous. 4. The presence of subpleural ecchymoses indicates a rapid and violent death, whether the violence be from internal or external causes. A Committee of the Societe de Medecine Legale was appointed to examine the value of this post-mortem appearance as a positive indica- tion of death by suftbcation. They reported: (1) that subpleural ecchymoses may arise from spontaneous conditions irrespective of the cause of death; (2) that they may be met with in violent asphyxia by hanging, strangulation, submersion, by compression of the chest, and by suffocation, but in different degrees; (3) they are of value only when associated with other signs indicating the mode of death. (' Lancet,; 1878, ii. p. 305.) According to Tardieu, this dotted appearance of the surface of the lungs in suffocation is not attended with the apoplectic effusions in their substance which are met with in death from strangulation. Emphysema, or escape of air from rupture of the air-cells, is occasion- ally observed. The more rapidly suffocation has taken place, the more strongly marked are these ecchymosed spots. On the other hand, when the interruption of breathing has been slow and gradual, the substance of the lungs is more congested with blood, and then these dots or patches are merged in the general violet colour of the surface of the organs. The hning membrane of the windpipe and larger air- tubes is sometimes pale, but commonly dark-coloured when the lungs are congested. In the air-passages there is occasionally a frothy, reddish-coloured liquid in small vesicles. Liman disputes the accuracy of the observations of Tardieu regarding this appearance described by him as characteristic of death from sufib- cation. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1867, t. 2, p. 388.) According to Ogston, sen., the subpleural or punctiform ecchymoses observed by Tardieu were not present in the cases of nine adults who had died from suffocation. (' Brit._ Med. Jour.,' 1868, ii. p. 332.) On the other hand, they may be found in cases in which death has taken place from drowning, hanging, and strangulation. Too much rehance must not, therefore, be placed on their presence or absence. These spots of ecchymosis were found by Ogston, not only on the surface of the lungs, but on the heart, the scalp, the pericranium, the thymus gland, and other parts. That they are frequently absent in death from suffocation is shown by the obser- vations of other medical jurists. (See ' Vierteljahrsschr. ftir Gerichtl. Med.,' 1867, 2, p. 146.) In an elaborate paper published in the same


[466/872 b22652516_0466.jp2]

SUFFOCATION. STATE OF THE HEART. 454 journal, Lukomsky has endeavoured to show, by a variety of experi- ments, the circumstances under which we may expect to find these ecchymoses in death from suffocation, and the cases in which they are Hkely to be absent. ('Vierteljahrsschr. fur Gerichtl. Med.,' 1871, 2, p. 58.) Page, who has experimented on this subject, agrees with the above- named medical jurists in considering that Tardieu has been too hasty in making these dotted or subpleural ecchymoses a certain diagnostic sign of death from suffocation. According to him, they probably arise from the continued and violent efforts to breathe in the early stage of asphyxia. Their occurrence in the lungs of a hanged person would not, therefore, justify the inference that th'C person had been first suffocated and afterwards hanged. The same remark appHes to drown- ing. Page found, on drowning animals, that subpleural ecchymoses were so numerous on the lungs as to give to the organs a granitic aspect. (' On the Value of Certain Signs of Death from Suffocation,' Edinb., 1873.) He has drawn the following conclusions from his experiments:—1. The ecchymoses or patches of extravasated blood found on the surfaces of certain internal organs, and notably of the lungs, are not peculiar to any one mode of death by asphyxia, but are commom to all. '2. The ecchymoses are not, therefore, diagnostic of death from suffocation. 3. They probably occur with greater frequency in suffocation, owing to the absence of interference with the cerebral circulation, and the opportunity which the means usually employed afford for respiratory struggles. The heart presents no special appearance indicative of the mode of death, if we except the presence of small spots of ecchymosis faund below the investing membrane, like those met with on the lungs. They have been found near the roots or origin of the great vessels, but are not so frequently observed in this organ as in the lungs. The blood is generally dark and fluid; but sometimes coagula are met with. The stomach and intestines have been obser\''ed to present patches of lividity. Casper has found the kidneys more strongly congested with blood than the liver, spleen, and other organs. The vessels of the brain are sometimes congested, but at other times they do not appear to be more than ordinarily full. Their condition may be affected by the congested state of the lungs, as well as by the slowness or rapidity with which death takes place. Other appearances which have been described are of an accidental nature, and are not connected with death from suffocation. In a case of alleged murder by suffocation, respecting which the author was consulted in 1857, the following appearances were met with. The body was lying on the bed: the right leg was drawn up towards the body; the right arm was bent, with the hand directed towards the face; the left hand was lying upon the chest. The lips were livid, the tongue protruded and swollen, and there was a bloody fluid issuing from the nostrils. There was no mark of constriction on the neck; the eyes were half-open; the body was rigid and stifl warm. The face and neck were much swollen, and the skin of these parts, as


[467/872 b22652516_0467.jp2]

455 EVIDENCE OF THE CAUSE OF DEATH. well as of the chest, abdomen, arms, and legs, was covered with dark livid patches. The brain was gorged with venous blood. The lungs were congested. The heart was soft and flaccid, and its cavities were empty. The mucous membrane, as well as the tissues of the air-passages, were much congested with dark liquid blood—the blood was everywhere liquid. The stomach contained a small quantity of dark-coloured liquid, and the greater end was reddened. The spleen was congested. The emptiness of the cavities of the heart was at first considered to be inconsistent with death from asphyxia; but this condition of the heart is occasionally found. It may be stated that in this case the deceased, a female, was greatly exhausted by sickness and purging. On the second day of her illness she was found dead in the state described, and her husband was charged with having suffocated her. Evidence of Death from Suffocation.—In medical jurisprudence there is not, perhaps, an instance in which we have fewer medical data upon which to base an opinion than in a case of alleged death from suffoca- tion. The inspection of the body of a person suffocated, if we except the peculiar condition of the surface of the lungs described by Tardieu, presents so little that is peculiar, that a medical man, unless his suspicions have been roused by circumstantial evidence, or by the discovery of foreign substances in the air-passages, would probably pass it over as a case of death without any assignable cause—in other words, from natural causes. In examining the body of the woman Campbell, who was suffocated by Burke in Edinburgh, Christison was unable to come to a conclusion respecting the cause of death until some light had been thrown on the case b}'^ collateral evidence. On this occasion, a violent death was suspected, because there were marks of violence externally, and the face of the deceased presented some of the characters of strangulation. These conditions, however, are by no means essential to death from suffocation, and when they exist they can only be regarded as purely accidental accompaniments. Appear- ances similar to those found in the bodies of suffocated persons, if we except the dotted ecchymoses on the lungs, are frequently met with in inspections when death has taken place as a consequence of disease or accident. They can, therefore, furnish no conclusive evidence of the kind of death; they scarcely permit a witness to establish a presump- tion on the subject, until, by a careful examination of the bod}", he has ascertained that there is no other cause of death depending on organic disease or on violence. Medical evidence may, however, be serviceable in some instances. Thus, let the general evidence establish that a deceased person has probably been suffocated, the witness may have it in his power to state that the appearances in the body are consistent with this kind of death; that the body is in all respects healthy and sound; and that death was probably sudden—as where, for instance, undigested food is discovered in the stomach. The presence of ecchy- moses on the surface of the lungs may justify an opinion of death by suffocation when no other cause is apparent. In all cases of this description, we must bear in mind that an opinion relative to the sup- posed cause of death is to be formed from the medical circumstances


[468/872 b22652516_0468.jp2]

456 SUFFOCATION FROM ACCIDENTAL CAUSES. and from what we have ourselves seen, unless it be otherwise allowed by the court. From this want of clear evidence, a great difference of opinion on the cause of death frequently exists among medical witnesses. Accidental suffocation is not unfrequent; and there are various con- ditions under which a person may die suffocated, only discoverable after death. 1. Diseases about the tongue, larynx, or throat may have advanced to such an extent as effectually to prevent breathing. 2. The deceased may have fallen, and the mouth become covered wdth dust, ashes, mud, or other substances; and if helpless, as in the case of an infant or an aged person, or of one who is intoxicated, death may thus easily take place. A child was found dead in a room, with its face in the ashes under a grate ; it had fallen during the absence of the mother, and, from its helpless condition, had speedily become suffocated. Some of the ashes were found in the windpipe. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xvii. p. 642.) In 1878, a boy died from suffocation under the following circumstances. He was playing in a corn-loft with some companions, when, in order to hide himself, he got into a wheat-bin about eight feet deep. He w^as drawn through the wheat towards the machine, and was thus buried in the corn. Although extricated in a few minutes, he was quite dead. In trials for murder or manslaughter, a medical opinion respecting the accidental suffocation of a drunken person under similar circumstances is occasionally required. These persons, it must be remembered, are generally as helpless as children; if they fall in a position so that the mouth is covered, they may be so powerless from intoxication as not to be able to escape. A case was brought into Guy's Hospital in 1870, in which a man subject to epileptic fits had lost his life by accidental suffocation. He was found dead, lying with his face in a quantity of mud. On a post-mortem examination, the teeth and nostrils had liquid mud adhering to them, and the tongue was thickly coated with it. The right side of the heart was full of blood, and there was a large quantity on the left side extending into the aorta. The blood, as is frequently the case in sudden death, was liquid. There were a few gritty particles in the windpipe, but no froth. There was no doubt that the man had died from asp%xia, as a result of accidental suffocation during a fit. ('Lancet," 1870, ii. p. 82.) In 1877, an inquest was held in which it was proved that the deceased was found dead in bed, lying with his face downwards and one arm under his head. The medical evidence showed that the cause of death was suffocation, by reason of the deceased having turned with his face to the pillow, and so covered his mouth and nostrils. 3. A portion of food may have remained fixed in the larynx or throat. Children are sometimes accidentally suffocated by drinking boiling water from a tea-kettle. The parts about the larynx then become swollen from the action of the hot water, and breathing cannot take place. 4. Accidental suffocation is not uncommon among infants, when they sleep with adult persons (overlaying). A child may be in this way speedily destroyed. Even the close wrapping of a child's head in a shawl, to protect it from cold, may effectually kill it, without any con-


[469/872 b22652516_0469.jp2]

457 HOMICIDAL SUFFOCATION. vulsive struggles to indicate the danger to which it is exposed (p. 459, 'post). Convulsions by no means necessarily attend on death from suffocation. Those instances of accidental suffocation which depend on disease or on the impaction of food, are easily known by a careful examination of the parts about the throat; and generally they present no difficulty. In other instances, when a child or a drunken person is presumed to have been suffocated owing to the position in which he has fallen, evidence as to the position of the body, or even the actual sight of the body, is necessary before forming an opinion. The following questions may here arise: Was the position such as to be expHcable on the supposition of accident ? Was it not such a position as might have been given to it by a murderer ? Could not the deceased have had strength or presence of mind to escape ? Could he have been actually suffocated in the position in which his body was discovered ? A little reflection upon the circumstances—for here something more than medical facts will be required—may enable us to give satisfactory answers to these questions. Some singular cases are on record, in which persons have wilfully destroyed themselves by blocking up the throat mechanically. An instance of this form of suicide is reported. (' Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' 1842, p. 391.) A woman confined in prison forced a hard cotton plug into the back of her throat. The cavities of the chest and abdomen had been already examined, and a medical certificate given that the deceased had died of apoplexy. The body was sent to one of the anatomical schools, and on re-inspection it was accidentally found that the throat was firmly blocked up with a plug of spindle-cotton. Homicide by suffocation is not very common, although it is a ready means of perpetrating murder. Hitherto the cases which have come before our courts have generally been those either of infants, or of the aged and infirm, or of persons enfeebled by illness (see, however, Beg. V. Kerr, p. 449). In regard to the latter, the rigorous administration of the law has succeeded in putting a check to this crime; but with respect to children, it probably yet continues. Death by suffocation is most difficult to detect; and, unless the assailant has employed an unnecessary degree of violence, it is probable that the crime may pass altogether unsuspected. Homicide by suffocation would not be attempted on healthy adult persons, unless they were in a state of intoxication, and thereby rendered defenceless. It is certain that most individuals would have it in their power, unless greatly incapacitated by disease or intoxication, to offer such a degree of resistance as would leave upon their bodies indubitable evidence of murderous violence. Death from suffocation may be considered as presumptive of homicide, unless the facts are clearly referable to accident. Acci- dental suffocation is, however, so palpable, from the position of the body and other circumstances, that when death is clearly traced to this cause, it is not easy to conceive a case in which it would be difficult to distinguish it from one of actual murder. In some instances, the very means that have been adopted to produce suffocation may


[470/872 b22652516_0470.jp2]

458 SUFFOCATION OF INFANTS. forbid the supposition of accident, and clearly establish the fact of homicide. m The suffocation of new-born children, by the introduction of sub- I stances into the mouth, is not unfrequent. The unnecessary force employed generally leaves traces of violence, which may be easily discovered by a careful examination, even should it happen that the substance used for the murderous purpose has been removed. A child, one year old, after it had been fed -with a bottle, was put to bed at six o'clock, and died at midnight with signs of dyspnoea. On inspection ten hours after death, the lower lobes of the lungs were found softened, of a greyish colour, and apparently pulpy. Curdled milk was found in the windpipe and bronchi. There was no doubt that the milk had been vomited after the child was put to bed, and, on account of the horizontal position, a portion of it had been drawn by aspiration into the air-passages, and had caused suffocation. ('Lancet,' 1873, i. p. 669.) It is necessary to point out a dangerous practice common among ignorant nurses, which, without exciting suspicion on the part of a j coroner or medical witness, may be an occasional cause of death in | infants. In order to quiet a child, and to enable a nurse to sleep without disturbance, a bag made of wash-leather or rag, containing sugar, is thrust into the child's mouth. It is thus completely gagged, and the child soon becomes quiet, respiring chiefly through the nostrils. If these by any accident become obstructed, or by the act of aspiration the bag should fall to the back of the throat, death from suffocation results, the infant being helpless. The suspension of breathing may be so gradual that the child may die without ciying or convulsions. The removal of the bag from the mouth, as no violence has been used, will remove ever}^ trace of the cause of death; and, in order to exculpate herself, the guilty person may ascribe death to 'fits.' In one instance, an infant was timely saved by the mother having discovered, while the nurse was sleeping, a mass of wash-leather projecting from its mouth. The woman awoke, and attempted to remove and conceal the leather, but she was discovered in the act. The detection of this dangerous practice can only be a matter of accident; hence a fatal case can be rarely the subject of a coroner's inquest, and even then medical evidence may fail to throw any light upon the cause of death. In one instance only have we known it to give rise to a criminal charge. {Beg. V. Cox, Warwick Lent Ass., 1848.) The mother, a pauper, was tried for the attempt to suffocate her infant, eleven days old. The child was discovered by another person with a piece of rag hanging from its mouth. It was hvid in the face, but when the rag was removed it made a violent gasp, and recovered its breath. There was no mahce on the part of the prisoner, but it was made a strong point in her favour that instances had occurred in the workhouse, in which women had with impunity put rags with sugar into the mouths of infants in order to soothe and keep them quiet. She was acquitted. This admitted practice of infantile suffocation appears to have passed without reprimand or even comment, although this plan of soothing


[471/872 b22652516_0471.jp2]

DEATH FROM SMOTHERING. POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES. 459 infants is just as likely to be fatal to them as that of encircling their necks with tight ligatures. Smothering.—Smothering is a variety of suffocation, and consists in the mere covering of the mouth and nostrils in any way so as to prevent the free ingress and egress of air. Like drowning, hanging, or strangulation, it produces death by asphyxia. In new-born infants it is not an unusual occurrence, sometimes originating in accident, and at others in criminal design. An infant may be speedily destroyed by smothering. If the mouth be only lightly covered with clothing, or slightly compressed, so that respiration is interrupted, as in the act of carrying a child in the arms, this will suffice to cause death; and, as it has been already remarked, death may take place without being preceded by convulsions or other striking symptoms. Smothering is not often resorted to as a means of perpetrating murder, except in infants or in debilitated and infirm adults. In a case which occurred at Ayr, a woman was charged with the murder of her child by smothering it in her shawl. She was travelling in a steamboat; it was a cold stormy day, and she had wrapped the shawl closely round the head of the child. There could be no doubt, from the moral circumstances, that she had intended to kill it; but the defence was that she had merely intended to protect the child from the cold, and it was suffocated before she was aware of it. There were no facts to exclude this defence, and the woman was acquitted. But children may be thus accidentally destroyed through the ignorance of persons who nurse them. According to Wakley, infants are frequently found dead owing to their being suckled at night while the woman is in bed. The child's face is pressed on the breast; mother and child fall fast asleep; the head slips beneath the clothes, and the child is then quietly suffocated. There is no mark of pressure or violence on the body. (' Lancet,' 1858, i. p. 70.) This statement is strongly confirmed by the annual returns of the Registrar-General. A child (five days old) died quietly on its mother's arm while lying in bed. There was much lividity about the head, neck, and back; but there were no marks of violence. The bronchial tubes of the right lung contained bright florid blood. The left lung was gorged with blood, but none had escaped. The heart was firmly contracted, and there was only a small quantity of blood in its right cavities. According to the returns of the Registrar- General, suffocation in *bed from ' overlaying' is a frequent cause of violent death among infants. Infants are readily smothered by the bed-clothes accidentally covering the mouth and nostrils, and they have not the power to change their position. The appearances met with in the bodies of three children who had died under these circumstances are thus described by Canton. Ex- ternally : features placid; hps congested; eyes not unduly prominent; conjunctivae rather reddened; hands clenched; no patches of ecchy- mosis found on the skin. Internally : head—^patches of effused blood here and there beneath the pericranium; great congestion of the pia mater, accompanied by numerous effusions of blood, varying in size from a pin's point to a silver penny (sj-c) in superficial extent; a little


[472/872 b22652516_0472.jp2]

460 HOMiaDAL SMOTHERING. clear fluid in the ventricles ; some frothy mucus in the windpipe and bronchi, with redness of their lining membrane. The lungs were much congested and crepitant, whilst beneath the pleurae, blood was eflused, presenting numerous small bright-red patches and fine points (puncti- form ecchymoses). The pericardium contained some serum, and was spotted in its whole extent in the manner described; the vasa vasorum of the heart's great vessels and thoracic aorta were minutely injected. The right cavities of the heart in all the cases contained dark liquid blood; the left cavities were nearly empty; the tissue of the organ was free from effused blood. The surface only of the thymus gland was mottled like the heart. There is a prevalent notion that congestion of the lungs is an invari- able accompaniment of death from suffocation, and where this was not found it has been hastily assumed that death had taken place from some other cause. Some remarks on this post-mortem appearance have been made in the chapter on Drowning; and it is desirable, in reference to future cases, to point out the fallacy involved in the assumption that congestion of the lungs is necessarily present in death from suffocation. Watson observes that the gorged state of the right side of the heart and lungs is greatest where the act of suffocation (asphyxia) has been slow and gradual, by the access of air to the lungs not having been completely prevented. When, on the other hand, death has taken place quickly or suddenly from this cause, there is little or no unusual congestion of blood in the lungs or heart. (' On Homicide,' p. 115.) At p. 118 he describes a case of death from suffo- cation in which the lungs were natural; and in the case of Campbell, for whose murder by suffocation Burke was convicted and executed in 1828-9, Christison and Newbigging found the organs within the chest perfectly natural, the lungs remarkably so, and unusually free from infiltration. The blood in the heart and great vessels, as well as throughout the body, was fluid and black. ('Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' vol. xxxi. p. 239.) Again, in the case of Carlo Ferrari, for the murder of whom Bishop and Williams were convicted in London in 1831, the lungs were quite healthy, and not congested; the heart was rather small, contracted, and its four cavities were perfectly empty. The prisoners in this case confessed that they had destroyed the deceased by suffocation. From these facts it will be perceived that the actual state of the lungs and heart in the bodies of those who had been notoriously murdered by suffocation, is that which has been wrongly pronounced to be inconsistent with this mode of death. Certain trials which took place many years since clearly proved that persons in a state of intoxication or infirmity had been murdered by smothering, for the sake of the money derived from the sale of the dead bodies. The victims were commonly destroyed by the assailant resting with his whole weight upon the chest, so as to prevent the motion of the ribs, and at the same time forcibly compressing the mouth and nostrils with his hands, to prevent the entrance of air. A case of this kind was referred to the author for examination in 1831. {Bex V. Elizabeth Boss, C. C. C, Dec. 1831.) It was remarkable for the


[473/872 b22652516_0473.jp2]

461 BURKING. MEDICAL EVIDENCE. fact that the prisoner was convicted of homicidal suffocation, although the body of the deceased was never discovered. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xxxvii. p. 481.) In Reg. v. Norman^ C. C. C, July, 1871, the prisoner, a girl, set. 15, was indicted for murder by suffocation. She was a nursery-maid, and had had the care of three children; the deceased, one of these children, being fifteen months old. There were three other charges of murder by suffocation against her, and one of an attempt to murder. There were suspicious marks of violence on the lower lip of the deceased, as if produced by pressure of the mouth against some hard substance.. The medical witnesses attributed death to suffocation by pressure on the mouth, but admitted that the marks might have been accidental. On this admission the prisoner was acquitted. On the trial for the attempt to murder, the girl was convicted, and the evidence given in this case threw a light upon the mode in which she might have perpetrated the four murders with which she was charged. A little boy, aet. 10, was heard to give an alarm while in bed; it was a stifled cry. The prisoner was caught in the act of getting off the bed. The boy was in great agitation, and said that the prisoner had tried to strangle him while he was sleeping. He was awoke by feeling a hand on his mouth and throat. He tried to make a noise, upon which the prisoner, who was lying upon him, gave him a sweetmeat, and told him not to cry. His lips and throat were very sore. The prisoner was convicted and sentenced to ten years' penal servitude. There can be no doubt that the four murders were all perpetrated in a similar manner, by burking—the children being helpless, and unable to give an alarm. The conviction of the prisoner on the attempt simply arose from this child being older and better able to resist. The facts show that medical science in many of these cases is powerless to aid the law. It is not always possible to distinguish murder by smothering or suffocation from accident. In reference to the case of Campbell, Christison observes ' that the conviction in the pubHc mind, that a well-informed medical man should always be able to detect death by suffocation simply by an inspection of the body and without a knowledge of collateral circumstances, is erroneous, and may have the pernicious tendency of throwing inspectors off their guard, by leading them to expect strongly marked appearances in every case of death from suffocation. That such appearances are very far from being always present ought to be distinctly understood by every medical man who is required to inspect a body and give an opinion of the cause of death.' At the same time, in the absence of marked appearances to indicate violent death, due caution should be used by a medical witness in expressing an opinion. At the trial of the prisoner Burhe, Christison restricted his opinion by stating that death by violence was, from the medical circumstances alone, very probable—a degree of caution which, on similar occasions, it will be desirable for a medical witness to imitate. It is not possible to carry medical evidence further than this. There is nothing in the act of suffocation, as there is in wounds, poisoning, hanging, or strangulation, by which the hand of a criminal can be clearly and unequivocally traced.


[474/872 b22652516_0474.jp2]

SUFFOCATION OR POISONING BY GASES. 462 As an accident, smothering may be conceived to take place when a person falls, in a state of intoxication and debility, so that his mouth is in any way covered, or the access of air to the mouth or nostrils is interrupted. On an inspection of the body, the appearances elsewhere described will be met with in the lungs and heart. If the person has been able to struggle, it is probable that shght marks of violence in the shape of scratches or bruises may be found about the mouth and nostrils, with bruises or marks of pressure on the chest, legs, or arms, and redness of the mucous membrane, with a bloody mucous froth as well as foreign substances in the air-passages. The marks of violence may be slight, or even entirely absent. In a case of suspected murder, a medical jurist should look for the special indications of suffocation in the lungs, the circumstances under which the body or bodies are found, the evidence of sudden death in the presence of food in the stomach, and lastly the absence of any other cause to account for death. All these sources of evidence may fail; and as the means by which homi- cidal smothering was accomplished are not likely to be found with the body, a medical opinion on the case may become httle more than a conjecture. Still, this may suffice when the evidence from extraneous circumstances is strong. CHAPTER 42. GASEOTIS POISONS.—CARBONIC ACID.—SYMPTOMS.—APPEARANCES.—ANALYSIS. —EFFECTS OF CHARCOAL-VAPOUR.—CARBONIC OXIDE.—COAL AxND COKE VAPOUR.—SULPHUROUS ACID.—VAPOURS OF LIME, CEMENT, AND BRICK- KILNS.—CONFINED AIR.—COAL-GAS.—WATER-GAS.—CARBURETTED HYDRO- GEN.—NITROUS OXIDE.—SULPHURETTED HYDROGEN.—EFFLUVIA OF DRAINS AND SEWERS. Mode of Action of Gaseous Poisons.—In following common language, a medical jurist is compelled to apply the term ' suffocation' to another variety of death—viz. to that of poisoning by gases. Physiological accuracy must here be sacrificed, in order that we may make ourselves generally intelligible. Thus, if a person die from the effects of carbonic acid, of confined air, of sulphuretted hydrogen, or of other noxious gases, he is commonly said to die suffocated. Strictly speaking, he dies poisoned—as much so as if he had taken oxalic or hydrocyanic acid. The only differences are : (1) that the poison, instead of being liquid or solid, is gaseous; and (2) instead of being applied to the mucous membrane of the stomach, it affects that of the air-cells of the lungs. In the action of arsenetted hydrogen we have a clear instance of poisoning by a gas, and in the respiration of the narcotic vapours of chloroform and ether we have also illustrations of this form of poisoning. Owing to the fact that the poisonous material is in a finely divided state of vapour, and that in the air-cells of the lungs it meets at once with a large absorbing surface and instantly enters the blood, the effects are more rapid and more strongly marked. It has


[475/872 b22652516_0475.jp2]

463 THE CAUSE OF DEATH MISTAKEN". been observed, too, that some (and probably all) of these aerial poisons have an accumulative action—i.e. their effects continue to increase for a short period, even after a person has ceased to breathe them. The remarks made respecting the action of gases on the lungs apply equally to the effects produced by the vapours of alcohol, ether, chloro- form, and bichloride of methylene. The specific action of some of these vapours has been elsewhere noticed {ante, pp. 185,187). A person dies not only from the privation of oxygen, but from the absorption of the poisonous vapour into the blood through the pulmonary membrane. Although often described as cases of suffocation, they are not to be regarded as such. Hydrogen and nitrogen have been considered to be the only two gases which operate as negative agents, i.e. by simply excluding oxygen; but hydrogen breathed with oxygen in atmospheric proportions has been found to produce narcotism. Norris has endeavoured to determine experimentally the relative periods of time within which some of these vapours and gases may prove fatal. He employed a chamber filled with common air in which a rat could live without inconvenience for a period of three hours. When pure hydrogen was substituted for air, the animal lived for nine minutes. This was taken to represent death from the privation of air or oxygen, and assuming this as a standard, the following table shows the time in which death occurred with different gases and vapours:— Min. Sec. Pure hydrogen gas in .90 Common air saturated with ether . . . .50 „ ,, with chloroform . . . 1 30 „ „ with bichloride of methylene . 0 20 Pure nitrous oxide gas 0 25 Oxygen gas saturated with ether . . . . 8 30 „ „ with chloroform . . . 0 25 ,, ,, with bichloride of methylene . 1 45 Pure carbonic acid gas 0 8 ('Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1873, ii. p. 401.) In the experiments on dogs performed by the Committee of the Med.-Chir. Society, it was found that, under complete privation of air, the heart's action continued for a period of eight minutes and twenty seconds. This very nearly corre- sponds to the time at which life ceases in pure hydrogen. These results show that the gases and vapours are directly poisonous agents, and that they do not produce their effects merely by excluding oxygen or air. The Cause of Death mistaken.—The greater number of the poisonous gases are chiefly complex products of art, and are never likely to be met with in the atmosphere so abimdantly as to produce injurious consequences; hence fatal accidents arising from their inhalation most commonly occur under circumstances which can leave no doubt re- specting the real cause of death. The peculiar effects of all of these it will not be necessary to describe in this place ; but there are three, a


[476/872 b22652516_0476.jp2]

ACTION OF CARBONIC ACID. 464 knowledge of the properties and operation of which may, on certain occasions, be required of a medical jurist; these are the carbonic acid, carbonic oxide, and sulphuretted hydrogen gases. Agents of this descrip- tion can rarely be employed with any certainty as instruments of murder; and, if they were so employed, the fact could be estabhshed only by cir- cumstantial e\ddence. One alleged instance of murder by carbonic acid is, however, reported by Devergie. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1837,1.1, p. 201.) Death, when arising from the breathing of any of the gases, is generally attributable to suicide or accident. In France it is by no means uncommon for a person to commit self-destruction by sleeping in a closed apartment in which charcoal has been suffered to burn; wliile in England accidental deaths are sometimes heard of where coal or coke has been employed as fuel in small and ill-ventilated rooms. On such occasions, a person may be found dead without any apparent cause to the casual observer. The face may appear pale or livid, and the skin may be covered with patches of lividity. The discovery of a body under these circumstances may be sufficient, in the eyes of the vulgar, to create a suspicion of murder; and some person with whom the deceased may have been at that period on bad terms will perhaps be pointed out as the murderer. In such a case, it is obvious that the establishment of the innocence of the accused will depend entirely on the discrimination and judgment of a medical practitioner. An instance, illustrative of the consequences of this popular prejudice, occurred in London in 1823. Six persons were lodging in the same apartment, where they were all in the habit of sleeping. One morning an alarm was given by one of them, a woman, who stated that, on rising, she found her companions dead. Four were discovered to be really dead, but the fifth, a married man, whose wife was one of the victims, was recovering. He was known to have been on intimate terms with the woman who gave the alarm, and it was supposed that these two had conspired to destroy the whole party, in order to get rid of the wife. The woman who was accused of the crime was imprisoned, and an account of the supposed barbarous murder was soon printed and circu- lated in the metropolis. Many articles of food about the house were analysed in order to discover whether they contained poison, when all the circumstances were explained by the man stating that he had placed a pan of burning coals between the two beds before going to sleep, and that the doors and windows of the apartment were kept closed. (Christison, p. 583.) Cases of a similar kind, in which there was at first a strong suspicion of poisoning, have been reported. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xxxvi. p. 937; ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1843, t. 2, p. 56 ; ' Med. Chron.,' vol. ii. pp. 80, 84.) Cakbonic Acid. This gas is freely liberated in respiration, combustion, and fermenta- tion ; it is also produced in the calcination of chalk or limestone, and is sometimes diffused through the shafts and galleries of coal-mines, where it is one constituent of what is commonly called ' choke-damp.' Carbonic acid gas is likewise met with in wells, cellars, and other


[477/872 b22652516_0477.jp2]

POISONOUS PROPORTIONS. excavations in the earth. In these cases it is generally found most abundantly on the soil, or at the lower part of the well; and it appears to proceed from the decomposition of animal and vegetable matters confined in such situations. The slow evaporation of water strongly charged with the gas, while trickling over the sides of these excava- tions, may likewise assist in contaminating the air. Damp sawdust, straw, and decayed leaves slowly absorb oxygen from a confined atmo- sphere, and set free carbonic acid. H. Davy believed that carbonic acid, in a perfectly pure state, did not pass into the windpipe when an attempt was made to breathe it; the glottis seemed to close spasmodically at the moment that the gas came in contact with it. On diluting the carbonic acid with about twice its volume of air, he found that he could breathe it; but it soon produced symptoms of giddiness and somnolency. In a diluted state there is no doubt that it penetrates into the lungs, and that it is absorbed and circulated with the blood. In estimating the effects of this gas when mixed with air, a distinction must be made. The gas may either be simply added to the air, or it may be produced at the expense of the oxygen in the enclosed space or apartment. In the latter case, it must be remembered that every volume of carbonic acid thus produced represents an equal volume of oxygen removed. Such an atmosphere is, therefore, more destructive than another in which the air and gas are in simple admixture. If we assume that in each case the noxious atmosphere contains 10 per cent, of carbonic acid, then in one instance there will be 8 per cent, more of oxygen and 8 per cent, less of nitrogen than in the other, since the production of 10 parts of carbonic acid as a result of combustion implies the loss of 10 parts of oxygen. This difference in the proportions may not be, practically speaking, correct, because there is no apartment sufficiently closed to prevent air rushing in from the exterior while combustion is going on within it; but, never- theless, the above statement may be taken as an approximation to the truth. The air in small apartments is rapidly vitiated by combustion, especially when the room is not properly ventilated by the door, window, or fireplace. In 1874, a man and his wife were found dead in their bedroom at Bristol, in the attitude of making their escape. A paraffin- lamp was still burning on the table. The noxious vapour from this lamp, in a small, ill-ventilated room, had sufficed to cause death. The statements made by chemists and physiologists, respecting the proportion of carbonic acid in air required to produce noxious or fatal effects on human beings, are very conflicting. Small animals, such as birds and mice, have been generally made the subjects of experiment, but the results thus obtained cannot be satisfactorily applied to show the relative action of carbonic acid on man. Berzelius stated that a proportion of 5 per cent, in air was not injurious, and that such a mix- ture might be usefully employed in the treatment of consumption. Allen and Pepys inferred from their experiments on guinea-pigs that 10 per cent, of the gas would prove fatal to man. In the more recent experiments of Bernard, this inference is corroborated by the fact that a bird died in two hours and a half in an atmosphere consisting (in 100 2 H


[478/872 b22652516_0478.jp2]

466 CARBONIC ACID. SYMPTOMS. parts) of 9-5 of carbonic acid, 28 of oxygen, and 62*5 of nitrogen. (' Les Sub. Toxiques,' 1857, p. 135.) In this case the proportion was less than 10 per cent., while the proportion of oxygen was 7 per cent, more than that existing in the atmosphere. On the other hand, Demarquay says that one part of carbonic acid (25 per cent.) and three parts of air produced in man but slight discomfort after being breathed for some time. According to this writer, most of the accidents caused by charcoal-vapour, confined air, and gases in fermenting vats, are wrongly ascribed to carbonic acid, and should be attributed to carbonic oxide, sulphuretted hydrogen, alcoholic vapours, or other gases not yet understood. ('Chem. Isews,' Aug. 4, 1865.) Those who have employed mixtures of carbonic acid and air for anaesthetic purposes have stated that air containing 20 per cent, of carbonic acid may be breathed without any injurious effects. Such a mixture would be composed (in 100 parts) of 20 of carbonic acid, 16 of oxygen, and 64 of nitrogen. In this mixture, if carefully made, oxy-combustion cannot be maintained; hence, if there was no error in the above pro- portions, it follows that a man can breathe with safety and live in air in which a candle will not burn. Bernard's carefully performed experi- ments are adverse to these statements. He found that animals died in atmospheres in which the proportion of carbonic acid varied from 12 to 18 per cent., while the amount of oxygen varied from 5 to 30 per cent. (' Les Sub. Toxiques,' p. 140.) When it is asserted that a person can thus breathe with impunity proportions which are fatal to life, it would be desirable to know how such mixtures were made, and whether proper care had been taken to prevent the breathing of air by the mouth and nostrils, while the supposed poisonous mixture was being inhaled. Lives are sometimes successively lost in wells charged with carbonic acid, and in brewers' vats, in consequence of one person after another entering, in the foolish expectation of at least being able to attach a rope to the body of an asphyxiated person. The moment that the mouth comes within the level of the invisible dense stratum of gas, muscular power is lost, and the person commonly sinks lifeless. Symptoms.—The symptoms of poisoning by carbonic acid vary according to the proportion contained in the air which is breathed. In a concentrated state there is sudden insensibility, followed by death, unless the person is immediately removed into pure air. When the air is gi'adually poisoned so as to acquire its lowest poisonous propor- tion, insensibility comes on more slowly; and, as in ordinary narcotic poisoning, it is preceded by giddiness, somnolency, and loss of muscular power. When the gas is in a fatal proportion, the symptoms commonly observed are as follows : A sensation of great weight in the head and of pressure in the temples, singing in the ears, a pungent sensa- tion in the nose, a strong tendency to sleep, accompanied by giddiness, and so great a loss of muscular power that, if the person be at the time in an erect posture, he instantly falls to the ground as if strack. The breathing, which is observed to be at first difficult and stertorous (snoring), becomes suspended. The action of the heart, which on the first accession of the symptoms is very violent, soon ceases; sensibility


[479/872 b22652516_0479.jp2]

POST-MORTEM APPEARANCES. 467 is lost, and the person now falls into a profound coma, or state of apparent death. The warmth of the body still continues; the limbs are relaxed and flexible, but they have been observed in some instances to become rigid, or even occasionally convulsed. The countenance is livid or of a leaden colour, especially about the eyelids and lips, but on some occasions it has been pale and placid. The access of these symptoms is stated to have been sometimes accompanied by a pleasing sensation of delirium, while at others the most acute pains have been suffered. In some instances there appears to have been irritability of the stomach, for the affected person has vomited the contents of his stomach in a semi-digested state. Those who have been resuscitated have felt pain in the head, or pain and soreness over the body for several days ; while, in a few severe cases, paralysis of the muscles of the face has supervened on recovery. An old woman occupied a room under one in which there was a quantity of nitric acid kept in store. Owing to some accident, a carboy was broken; the acid ran through the ceiling into the room below, acting upon and corroding the bed-coverings of the deceased's bed. As the room was quite filled with the nitric acid fiimes, a chemist was consulted, and he advised that whiting should be freely used for the purpose of neutralizing the acid. This advice was followed, and several persons, who were in the room witnessing the operation, felt oppressed and were obhged to leave it; they were observed to stagger as if intoxi- cated, on reaching the street. The room was then completely closed, and the whiting allowed to remain in contact with the acid. The deceased had suffered from diarrhoea for a few days previously, and was obliged to resort to the night-chair, which was in the room in which the accident had occurred. As she remained absent half an hour, some persons entered the apartment, and found her in a chair unable to move. She was taken into another room, and on a medical man being called to her, he found her sleepy and comatose and her mind confused; there was great difficulty of breathing, extreme lividity of the face and lips; the arms and legs were cold, and the pulse was full. In spite of efforts made to save her, she died in about an hour from the time at which she had entered the room. Those who found her in the apartment do not appear to have suffered. This was a case of slow poisoning by carbonic acid, for no carbonic oxide could have been evolved from the action of the acid on chalk. Age and debility from previous illness may account for the unusual circumstance that the deceased did not recover on being removed into a pure atmosphere. Post-mortem Appearances.—In some instances the face has been found livid and swollen, and the features distorted ; but more generall}^ it has been pale and placid, as if the person had died without a struggle in the position in which his body was found. The skin is sometimes livid, or presents patches of lividity, and the limbs are quite flaccid. The pupils have been found dilated. Internally, the veins are filled with liquid blood of a dark colour. In death from carbonic acid as a result of combustion, the blood has sometimes had a light-red colour (? from carbonic oxide—Ed,). The vessels of the lungs and brain are


[480/872 b22652516_0480.jp2]

4^8 CARBONIC ACID. ANALYSIS. THE COMBUSTION TEST. observed to be especially in a state of congestion. The tongue appears swollen, and sometimes the mucous membrane of the intestinal canal presents dark ecchymosed patches. The following appearances were met with thirty hours after death in the bodies of two adults, male and female, who died from the accidental introduction of carbonic acid into their bedroom from burning ashes. Externally, there was nothing un- natural, excepting a few slight discolorations on the back of the man ; internally, there was congestion of the membranes and great vessels of the brain. Each lateral ventricle contained about half an ounce of clear serum; the lungs were gorged with dark blood; and the lining membrane of the air-tubes (bronchi) was slightly reddened. The left side of each heart was nearly empty; the right contained a quantity of dark half-coagulated blood. The stomachs were healthy. The bodies were found on the floor of the bedroom in easy positions. The deceased persons had had the power to get out of bed, but were unable to escape from the chamber. It will be perceived from this description that there is nothing very characteristic in the appearances, and thus it is always easy to ascribe death to apoplexy or some other cause; but it should be remembered that carbonic acid itself is a narcotic poison, inducing cerebral congestion and apoplexy. Analysis.—Sometimes a medical jurist may be required to state the nature of the gaseous mixture in which a person may have died. There will be no difficulty in determining whether carbonic acid is or is not the deleterious agent in such a mixture. When it exists in a confined atmosphere, its presence may be identified, if previously collected in a proper vessel, by the following characters :—1. It extinguishes a taper if the proportion be above 12 or 15 per cent. 2. Lime-water or baryta- water is instantly precipitated white when poured into a jar of the gas ; and the precipitate thus formed may be collected by filtration, and proved to possess the well-known properties of carbonate of calcium or barium. Air containing only one per cent, of carbonic acid affects lime- water ; if it amounts to two per cent., a few cubic inches will suffice to show its presence by the lime-water test. The proportion in which carbonic acid exists in a mixture may be determined by introducing into a measured quantity, in a graduated tube over mercury, a strong solution of potash. Absorption will take place after a certain time, and the degree of absorption will indicate the proportion of carbonic acid present. Carbonic acid in a well may be collected for the purpose of testing, by lowering a bottle filled with fine sand, by means of a string attached to the neck, and guiding the bottle by another string attached to its base. When the bottle is within the stratum, it should be turned with its mouth downwards; and when the sand has fallen out, the bottle may be rapidly raised, with its mouth upwards, by pulling the string attached to the neck. It should be immediately stopped and the contents examined. Combustion in Mixtures containing Carbonic Acid.—In reference to suffocation by carbonic acid, there is one circumstance which requires attention. It is a matter of popular belief—and, in fact, it is asserted by some writers on asphyxia—that the burning of a candle in a suspected


[481/872 b22652516_0481.jp2]

469 DIFFUSION OF CARBONIC ACID. mixture of carbonic acid and air, is a satisfactory proof that it may be breathed with safety. The results of some experiments on this subject led the author to the conclusion that a candle will burn in air which is combined with even 10 or 12 per cent, of its volume of carbonic acid gas; and although such mixtures might not prove immediately fatal to man, yet they would soon give rise to giddiness, insensibility, and ultimately death, in those who, after having been once immersed in them, did not hasten to quit the spot. In air containing a smaller pro- portion than this (5 or 6 per cent.), a candle will readily burn, but it is probable that such a mixture could not be long respired without causing serious symptoms; hence the burning of a candle can he no criterion of safety against the effect of carbonic acid. It is true that it would not be safe to venture into a gaseous mixture in which a candle is extinguished; but the converse of this proposition is not true—namely, that a mixture in which a candle burns may be always breathed with safety. It has been observed on several occasions that the combustion of charcoal has been maintained in a room in which persons have been found in a state of insensibility from breathing the vapours. Diffusion of Carhonic Acid,—Some important medico-legal questions have arisen relative to the diffusion of this gas in air, when produced by combustion. It was formerly supposed that, owing to its great density (1'53), it would collect on the floor of an apartment, would gradually rise upwards and suffocate persons at different times, according to the level on which they might happen to be placed. Questions on this subject have been variously answered, and a great difference of opinion has arisen among witnesses. There are two im- portant points on which a correct answer to this inquiry must be based: first, the law of the diffusion of gases; and second, the effect of heat in greatly diminishing the specific gravity of a gas naturally heavier than air. There is no doubt that, in a narrow or confined vessel, exposed to air, carbonic acid is slow in escaping; nevertheless, it mixes with air, and passes off rapidly in proportion to the surface exposed. In the course of an hour or two, in spite of its great specific gravity, none will be contained within the vessel. The well-known Grotta del Cane at Pozzuoli, near Naples, has been referred to by those who hold that carbonic acid always tends to remain on the lowest level; but it has been forgotten that, in this and similar excavations, carbonic acid is continually issuing from crevices in the soil, so that that which is lost by diffusion is continually replaced: hence the illustration proves nothing. It may suffice to state that air and carbonic acid mix readily on contact in all proportions, although they enter into no chemical union. Thus then, at common temperatures, carbonic acid has no tendency to remain on the floor or soil, when there is a free access of air or contact with other gases. The combustion diminishes the specific gravity of the gas, and the carbonic acid therefore ascends with the heated current of air, and diffuses itself in the upper part of an apartment, when there are no means of carrying it ofi".


[482/872 b22652516_0482.jp2]

CARBONIC OXIDE. 470 Carbonic OxroE. The noxious effects of the vapour of burning charcoal are considered to be partly due to the presence of carbonic oxide, which appears to be chiefly extricated under a low or smouldering combustion of any kind of woody fibre. It is fatal to man and all animals. The action of this gas upon animal life has been made a subject of experiment by Bernard. (' Les Sub. Toxiques,' p. 164.) An atmosphere containing from 5 to 6 (even 1-lOth per. cent. Ed.) per cent, of it will destroy hfe. The blood and muscles are brightened in colour by this gas, while they are darkened by carbonic acid. Bernard has observed that this bright colour has been retained for three weeks (the Editor has observed it after seventeen months); and he considers the mode of action of this gaseous poison such that it prevents the arterial blood of the body from becoming venous, while carbonic acid operates by preventing the venous blood from becoming arterial. (Op. cit., pp. 182, 195.) Car- bonic oxide kills by combining with the red pigment of the blood, and rendering it insusceptible of taking up oxygen, and exchanging this in the tissues for eiBfete carbonic acid. This condition of the blood, as a result of the action of carbonic oxide, may occasion some doubt of the cause of death in cases of suffocation by fire. In 1858, an inquiry took place into the cause of death of fourteen persons, owing to a fire in a house at Bloomsbury. The medical witness, on examining the bodies, found a redness of the muscles and a redness of the blood. He therefore thought that death was not caused by suffocation, but from the inhalation of arsenical vapours, owing to some minerals containing arsenic having been partially consumed during the fire. But there was a total want of evidence to show that the vapours of arsenic, when breathed, would cause death so speedily as the noxious gases evolved by fire, or that they would redden the blood and muscles. On the other hand, the respiration of carbonic oxide would explain these facts. It is worthy of remark that, in many of the observed cases of death from charcoal- vapour, the blood has had a darker colour than natural: the greater solubility of carbonic acid, and the larger proportion in which it is produced, may account for this effect. The action of carbonic oxide on the body is that of a narcotic poison. Tourdes has ascertained that rabbits died in twenty-three minutes when kept in an atmosphere containing 1-15th of its volume of pure carbonic oxide; when the proportion was l-30th they died in thirty- seven minutes, and when l-8th in seven minutes. Letheb}'- states that in his experiments a mixture of one-half per cent, killed small birds in three minutes, and of 1^ per cent, in about half this time. The animals showed no sign of pain: they fell in a state of insensibility, and either died at once without convulsions, or they gradually passed into a state of profound coma. He found, on inspection, that the blood was redder than usual, that the muscles of the heart were somewhat gorged, and that the brain was congested. ('Lancet,' 1862, i. p. 219.) Hoppe- Seyler states that animals which had been made to breathe carbonic


[483/872 b22652516_0483.jp2]

CHARCOAL-VAPOUR. oxide were restored by artificial respiration continued for some time, and, under these circumstances, the gas was expired as carbonic acid, having undergone further oxidation in the blood. It may be detected in the blood by the spectroscope. According to some observations, carbonic oxide is eliminated from the lungs as such without being con- verted into carbonic acid. (' Lancet,' 1873, i. p. 741.) It is a remarkable fact that with the bright-red colour of the blood seen in this form of poisoning, two absorption-bands similar to those of oxy-haemoglobin appear, and nearly in the same situation. They are, however, more refrangible than these, and are more in the greenish- yellow rays. A reducing agent (sulphide of ammonium) does not affect these bands, as it does those of oxidized blood. Hence, if the person breathes for only a short time, the carbonic oxide is expelled. In poisoning by coal-gas, carbonic oxide appears to be sometimes the cause of death. It is always a constituent of this gas, but in variable proportion (see p» 479). Charcoal-Vapour . The vapour given off during the combustion of charcoal is not pure carbonic acid, but a mixture of gases. It operates fatally when breathed, partly in consequence of the carbonic acid contained in it, and partly from the presence of a variable proportion of carbonic oxide. The proportions of these gases, however, are subject to variation, according to whether the combustion is vivid or not. When the charcoal was burning vividly, the quantity of carbonic acid was found by Orfila to be less than when it was either nearly extinguished or beginning to burn. In the former case the carbonic acid was in the proportion of about 11 per cent, by volume, in the latter the proportion amounted to about 14 per cent. Leblanc found that charcoal burning in the open air produced about one-half per cent, of carbonic oxide. There is no doubt that a low or imperfect combustion is more favourable to the production of this gas, and it is considered to operate more powerfully on the body than carbonic acid. According to Leblanc, a bird was killed instantly by breathing air containing 4 or 5 per cent, of carbonic oxide: 1 per cent, only sufficed to cause death in two minutes. Charcoal-vapour may be regarded as a mixture of carbonic acid, carbonic oxide, aqueous vapour, and air partially deoxidized. The fatal effects produced by the vapour are owing to the action of carbonic acid and carbonic oxide, and, according to Bernard, a mixture of the two is more destructive than either gas separately. (' Les Sub. Toxiques,' p. 212.) Leblanc endeavoured to determine the proportion of the gases in charcoal-vapour when this was in such a condition as to prove fatal to animal life. The vapour was conducted from some fully ignited fuel into an enclosed space in which there was a middle- sized dog whose condition could be watched. In ten minutes the animal fell exhausted, and in twenty minutes it died, after some hard breathing. A candle burnt with its usual brightness in the closed room, and it was only ten minutes after the death of the dog, that the flame of the candle, after becoming paler and paler, was extinguished.


[484/872 b22652516_0484.jp2]

472 CHARCOAL-VAPOUR. SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES. The air of the chamber was at this time collected and analyzed; it contained, in 100 parts—carbonic acid, 4-61; carbonic oxide, 0-54; carburetted hydrogen, 0*04; oxygen, 19-19; and nitrogen, 75-62. It would thus appear that less than 5 per cent, of carbonic acid is fatal to life when so little as one-half per cent, of carbonic oxide is mixed with it. (Bernard, op. cit, p. 159.) The burning of a candle under the circumstances will also show that oxy-combustion may be maintained in a mixture by which an animal is killed, and therefore that combus- tion can furnish no criterion of safety in apartments in which charcoal has been burnt. Biefel and Poleck have shown that charcoal-fumes contain on an average carbonic acid and carbonic oxide in the relative proportions of twenty to one; and that carbonic oxide is the chief poisonous agent. ('Zeitschr. fiir Biologic,'Bd. xvi. p. 279.) Symptoms and Appearances after Death,—The following case, illus- trating the effects of charcoal-vapour, occurred to Collambell. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xxvii. p. 693.) A man was engaged to clean the windows of three small rooms on the basement-floor of a house. The first room had a door opening into a courtyard; the others merely communicated with each other by a central door, and there was no fireplace in any one of them. A brazier of burning charcoal had been placed in the outer room for the purpose of drying it, but it appeared that the deceased had shut the outer door, and had removed the brazier into the inner room of the three, leaving the communicating doors open. In two hours the man was found quite dead, lying on the floor of the middle room. The countenance was pale, as well as the whole of the skin; the eyes were bright and staring, the pupils widely dilated, the lips bloodless, the jaws firmly fixed, the tongue protruding; and the face and the limbs were cold. Some frothy mucus had escaped from the mouth. The person who discovered the deceased found the ashes in the brazier still burning, and he experienced great oppression in breathing. An inquest was held, but without an inspection of the body, and a verdict of ' accidental death ' returned. The body was afterwards privately inspected by Collambell. On opening the head the vessels on the surface of the brain were found much distended with dark hquid blood; the pia mater was bedewed with serum. The brain was of unusually firm consistency, and numerous bloody points appeared on making a section of it. The lateral ventricles were distended with about an ounce and a half of pale serum, and the vessels of the choroid plexus were much congested. The cerebellum was firm, and presented on section numerous bloody points. About two ounces of serum, tinged with blood, were collected from the base of the skull. The lungs had a slate colour. On the left side of the chest there were eight ounces of serum tinged with blood, and nearly an equal quantity on the right side. On cutting into the organs, a large quantity of serous fluid, mixed with blood, escaped. The bronchial tubes were filled with a frothy fluid tinged with blood. The pericardium contained an ounce of pale serum; the heart was enlarged,—its cavities contained no blood; the liver and kidneys were, however, much gorged. There was no doubt that the cause of death was the inhalation of charcoal-vapour ;


[485/872 b22652516_0485.jp2]

473 FATAL CASES. and it is probable that the man died from respiring but a compara- tively small proportion. The capacity of the chambers must have reached nearly two thousand cubic feet; the deceased had been there only two hours, and when the person who discovered him entered the rooms, the air was not so vitiated but that he could breathe, although with some oppression. The ftiel was then in a state of combustion. In a case of death from charcoal-vapour that was referred to the author for examination in 1851, there was a considerable etfusion of blood in the submucous tissue of the stomach. This appearance led to a strong suspicion of irritant poisoning. A full investigation of the circumstances, however, showed that the suspicion was unfounded. The vapour had descended through a flue communicating with the bedroom in which the deceased slept with her husband; it destroyed the wife, and nearly killed the husband. A stove with burning charcoal had been placed in the room above that in w^hich the couple slept, and an iron pipe conveyed the products of combustion into a flue, whence they had descended into the bedroom, and caused the fatal accident. It is sometimes difficult to account for the mode by which these gaseous mixtures find their way into an apartment. In the above-mentioned case we had great difficulty in procuring correct information. There was no fire in the bedroom, nor any source of combustion, and this at first strengthened the suspicion that the husband must have poisoned the wife at their supper on the previous night. Devergie relates a somewhat similar case, in which the wife was found dead in bed, while the husband, lying by her side, was in a state of unconsciousness, from which he did not recover until the next day. In this case there was neither stove nor fire, nor any source of combustion in the room. The noxious gases must have leaked into the room through fissures in a chimney adjoining it. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1871, t. 2, p. 441.) A mother and daughter went to bed. In the morning, the daughter was found on her face, dead—the face livid, and there had been copious bleeding from the nose. The mother was insensible, and recovered only after many hours under treatment. The cause of the accident was traced to an imperfect joint in a furnace- flue, which passed through the bedroom to a chimney. This adjoined their bed, and the leakage took place directly upon them. The door was shut, and the smell, perceived at first, was supposed to come in from the outside. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xlvii. p. 412.) In the case of a youth, set. 17, Guerard found the mouth and nostrils filled with froth. The liver and spleen were gorged with dark liquid blood; the heart was collapsed, and its cavities were empty, but Hquid and dark-coloured blood flowed from the large vessels. The windpipe and bronchi had a red colour, and were filled with frothy mucus. The membranes of the brain were congested, and the sinuses gorged with fluid blood. The face was pale, the eyelids were closed, and the pupils natural. There were livid patches over the body. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1843, t. 2, p. 57.) It often excites surprise on these occasions that no exertion has been made to escape, w^hen it would apparently require but slight efforts on


[486/872 b22652516_0486.jp2]

VAPOUR FROM BURNING WOOD. 474 the part of the person affected. The action of this vapour is very insidious: one of its first effects is to create an utter prostration of strength, so that even on a person awake and active, the gas may speedily produce a perfect inability to move or to call for assistance. (For a case illustrative of the dangerous effects of the diluted vapour, see 'Edin. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' vol. i. p. 541.) In this instance a charcoal-brazier was left, only for a short time, in the cell of a prison. It was removed, and the prisoners went to sleep. They experienced no particular effects at first, but after some hours two were found dead. Thus, then, an atmosphere which can be breathed for a short time with impunity may ultimately destroy life. Leudet has shown that in some persons the first effect of the inhalation of charcoal-fumes is to induce a state of unconsciousness. (' Jour, de Med.,' Oct. 1&83, p. 472.) Devergie first showed that the smothered combustion of wood may lead to the evolution of carbonic oxide, and give rise to dangerous consequences. ('Ann. d'Hj^g.,' 1835, t. 1, p. 442.) His remarks have been confirmed by two cases published by Bayard and Tardieu. A man and his Avife were found dead in bed. There was a smoky vapour in the apartment, but no fire had been lighted in the grate, and the chimney was blocked up. The planks of the floor were widely separated, and there was a large hole in the boards at the foot of the bed communicating with the apartment below. It was found, on examination, that some joists, connected with the flue of an iron plate which had been heated for making confectionery the previous day, were in a smouldering state; that the vapour had entered the bedroom of the deceased through the crevices in the floor, and, not finding a vent by the chimney, had kd to these fatal results. It is remarkable that the source of combustion w^as nearty nine yards distant, and one person who slept nearer to the flue of the iron plate entirely escaped. In the body of the husband the skin was of a reddish tint, the blood liquid, the cavities of the heart empty, the lungs gorged, and there was no subpleural ecchymosis. In the body of the wife there was less redness of the skin, the blood was coagulated in the cavities of the heart, principally on the right side extending to the vessels; less engorgement of the lungs, and a great number of subpleural ecchymoses, indicating that strong efforts had been made to respire. There was at first a rumour of poisoning, which was only removed by a close examination of the locahty. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1845, t. 1, p. 369.) Schauenburg has pubhshed the cases of two children who were destroyed in an hour by the vapour of burning wood. The mother had accidentally shut them up in a room, into which the vapour leaked from the wood employed to heat an oven. In each case the brain and its membranes were found highly congested, while the lungs were collapsed, and contained no more blood than is usually found in them. (' Vierteljahrsschr. fur Gerichtl. Med.,' 1872, 1, p. 40.) It may be observed, in reference to this vapour, that when produced from burning charcoal or wood—in spite of the great density of carbonic acid, the noxious gas is diffused rapidly throughout the whole of an apartment. This is owing partly to the effect of the heated current of air, and


[487/872 b22652516_0487.jp2]

VAPOUR FROM BURNING WOOD AND GUNPOWDER. 475 partly to the diffusion of gases, whereby heavy and light gases are soon uniformly intermixed. Bugnion and De la Harpe relate the following case, in which the effects were referable to carbonic oxide. The latter was called at one p.m. to see a child which had just died. On his amval, he found the dead body of a healthy-looking boy, aged five years, lying with dilated pupils on a bed in the natural attitude of sleep. The body was still warm ; rigor mortis had invaded the arms; and there was some opacity of the cornea. On the under surface of the hmbs, and on that side of the face on which the head rested, there were patches of cadaveric lividity. The mother did not know when death had taken place, having supposed the child to be asleep when she went to her work in the morning. By the side of the dead body of the child lay the father, who was unable to answer questions distinctly, laughed at whatever was said to him, and could give no information as to the death of his son. His face was suffused; there was foam on his lips; his breathing was very difficult; and his pulse was full and rapid. On another bed in the same room lay a boy of ten, pale, motionless, with cold clammy skin, thready pulse, and, in short, in a state of collapse. He recovered, and was out of danger in the evening. The mother, who slept in the same room, had, at first, felt scarcely any ill effects. In the course of the morning she felt unwell, and returned home from her work. The iUness and the death were traced to the use of a charcoal-stove in the room where all slept. The condition of the father agrees with a case referred to by Casper, in which temporary mania was induced by charcoal-vapours; and with a case to be presently reported. In the case of the boy, Bugnion and De la Harpe found the following appear- ances forty-eight hours after death. The tip of the tongue lay beneath the teeth; the inner surface of the lips was bright red and parch- mented; the rosy colour of the lungs was very noticeable, and these organs were gorged with blood, forming a striking contrast to the pale anaemic intestines. Only two small subpleural ecchymoses were found. The surface of the lung was uneven and bosselated, the depressed portions being of a deep violet hue, and containing a smaller quantity of air than the raised portions, which were rosy-red and emphysematous. On section, the tissue of the lung was found decidedly hypersemic and of a scarlet colour. The whole of the mucous membrane from the epiglottis to the small bronchi was of a uniform vermilion tint. On pressure, thick mucus, untinged with blood, exuded from the bronchi. The heart was pale and soft. The blood throughout the body was fluid, and of a brighter colour than usual. No petechise were found in the organs, except the left kidney. The brain was deeply congested. The autopsy is thus summarized: intense general bronchitis; pulmonary congestion, with partial atelectasis; hyperaemia of the upper portion of the body, with anaemia of the abdominal viscera; fluidity and universal bright colour of the blood. (' Med. Chron.,' vol. ii. p. 84.) Vapour of Gunpowder.—The vapour of exploded gunpowder is chieflj' a mixture of nitrogen with carbonic acid, cyanogen compounds, and the vapour of sulphide of potassium. When fired in a close place


[488/872 b22652516_0488.jp2]

COAL AND COKE VAPOURS. 476 where there is no A^entilation, gunpowder expels the air containing oxygen, and substitutes for it a mixture of gases not fitted to support hfe. The effects of such a mixture when breathed may be gathered from the following cases, communicated in 1873 by Smith, of Shepton Mallet. A boy, set. 14, went down a well immediately after a con- siderable charge of powder had been exploded in it. He dropped suddenly to the bottom of the well, and a man who followed him also dropped apparently lifeless. They were both drawn up as soon as possible. The man appeared stupefied, but speedily recovered. The boy was quite unconscious, was blue about the lips, almost pulseless, had epileptic convulsions, and appeared to be dying. He vomited much biliary and mucous fluid, and became worse after removal from the open air to the hospital ward. His breathing was loud, but air entered the lungs freely. The pupils were natural. Artificial respiration was used and warm water baths were applied to the feet, but he did not recover until after thirty-six hours. Coal and Coke Vapoues. Sulphurous Acid. Products from Burning Coal and Coke.—^The gases extricated in the smothered combustion of coal or coke, in addition to carbonic acid, contain carbonic oxide, and tarry vapours. We may expect to find in the atmosphere of a close room in which such a combustion has been going on, sulphurous acid gas ; and from coal, in addition to this, sulphuretted and carburetted hydrogen gases. These emanations are fatal to life ; but in consequence of their very irritating properties, they give warning of their presence, and are therefore less liable to occasion fatal accidents. From an accident which occurred at Colchester, in which two children lost their lives, it would appear that some persons are so ignorant as to believe that the vapour of coke is less fatal than the vapour of charcoal. The sulphurous acid gas, when existing in a small proportion in air, has the effect of irritating the air-passages so violently that, if accidentally breathed, it would commonly compel the person to leave the spot before the vapours had become sufficiently concentrated to destroy life. Nevertheless, accidents from the com- bustion of coal and coke sometimes occur. Sym'ptoms and Appearances.—The following cases will convey a knowledge of the symptoms and appearances which may be met with on these occasions. Four persons were brought into Guy's Hospital in a state of asphyxia. It appeared that on the previous evening they had shut themselves up in the forecastle of a coal-brig, and had made a fire. About six or seven o'clock on the same evening, some of the crew accidentally placed a covering over the flue on the outside, and thus stopped the escape of smoke from the fire, which was made of a kind of coal containing much sulphur. Early in the morning one^ of the crew, on opening the hatches, observed three of the inmates lying on the floor, unconscious and frothing at the mouth, and the fourth in his crib in a similar condition. The air in the place was most offensive. After the men were brought on deck, one of them, aged twenty-one, began to recover, and when brought to the hospital he seemed only


[489/872 b22652516_0489.jp2]

477 SULPHUROUS ACID. giddy, as if intoxicated: he soon completely recovered. Another, aged forty, after breathing oxygen gas and having brandy and ammonia administered to him, showed no symptoms of recovery, but died in a few hours. A third, aged seventeen, soon began to rally, and in a short time he was alDle to answer questions: he declared that at the time of the accident he felt no pain, sense of oppression, or weight, either in his head or chest. The fourth, aged fifteen, died the following day, having shown no symptoms of rallying. Stimulants were ad- ministered, and warm fomentations were used, but all efforts to produce reaction failed. The appearances presented by these persons when brought in were as follows: the lips were purple, the countenance livid, and the surface of the body cold; the hands and nails were purple; the breathing was quick and short; the pulse small, quick, and feeble; the pupils w^ere fixed, and there was total insensibility. The body of the man aged forty was inspected four hours after death. The membranes of the brain were congested, and there was a large quantity of fluid under the arachnoid membrane ; the sinuses were gorged with blood; the lungs were greatly congested, as were also the right cavities of the heeirt. It was remarked that, in its congested condition, this body was similar in appearance to that of a hanged culprit. The body of the lad aged fifteen was inspected about thirty- three hours after death. Under the pia mater or inner membrane of the brain was observed one small ecchymosed spot; in the substance of the brain there were more bloody points than usual ; a small quantity of fluid was found under the arachnoid membrane, and the sinuses were full of coagulated blood. The lungs showed no congestion, but the right cavities of the heart were much distended with blood. (For a report of cases of recovery from the effects of coal-vapour, see ' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. ix. p. 935, vol. xliii. p. 937 ; also ' Dub. Med. Press,' Jan. 31, 1849, p. 69.) A case showing the fatal effects of coal-vapour occurred to Davidson. A man lost his hfe from sleeping in a closed room with a fire to which there was no flue. The lungs were found gorged with blood, and the windpipe and bronchi were filled with a frothy muco-sanguineous fluid; the mucous membrane beneath was slightly injected; there was a small effusion in each pleural cavity; the right side of the heart was full of dark liquid blood; the dura mater was much injected; the sinuses of the brain and the veins of the pia mater were congested; and there was subarachnoid effusion. The substance of the brain, when cut, presented numerous bloody points. (' Edin. Month. Jour.,' 1847, p. 763.) Other cases are reported in the medical journals, which do not materially differ. As the persons are usually found dead, the post-mortem appear- ances only can be described. In one instance, a man, set. 30, and a cat, were found dead in a room in which coal was burnt in a stove pro- vided with, an iron pipe to carry off* the products of combustion. It was observed, after the fatal event, that the pipe was defective. It had a hole in it from corrosion just before passing through the wall. Sufficient coal-vapour had escaped through this to cause death in a few hours. (' Brit. Med. Jour./ 1876, i. p. 444.) In the ' Med. Times and


[490/872 b22652516_0490.jp2]

478 COAL AND COKE VAPOURS. SULPHUROUS ACID. Gaz.,' 1852, i. p. 353, the reader will find an account of three cases of recovery from the effects of coal-vapour. (See also, for other cases which proved fatal, the same journal, 1860, i. p. 323.) The fatal effects of the vapour of burning coke are strongly illustrated by the deaths of a mother and six children, varying in age from eight to eighteen years, in Toxteth Park, Liverpool, in 1878. The mother, Ann Cameron, set. 41, was last seen alive at eleven o'clock at night. Early on the following morning, when the small room in which they slept was entered, she and her children were found lying dead on the floor; and from the appearance of the bodies it was inferred that they had been dead for some hours. There was a strong smell of burning coke in the room; there was an iron bucket containing burnt coke in the middle of the room, and the door and windows had been closed, so that there were no means of ventilation. There was at first a suspicion of suicide, and then of murder, but the circumstances proved that the deaths had resulted from accidental suffocation by coke-vapour. Owing to the smallness of the room, which had a capacity of only 512 cubic feet, the noxious effects of the vapour must have been greatly accelerated. In another case, which occurred to Bury and Cullingworth, a woman, residing with her parents, gave the alarm at five p.m. that her father and mother were lying dead in the chamber, having gone to bed in their usual health the previous night. She staggered and seemed so excited that she was charged with being drunk by the police, and was subsequently charged with causing the deaths. The dead bodies of an elderly man and woman were found lying on the bed in the room—the man on his back; the woman resting on her knees with her face buried in the man's thigh, and, on turning her body on to its back, it was observed that the nose had been bleeding. It transpired that the deaths had been caused by the fumes of coke, burning in the fire all night. In the morning the surviving woman awoke, and found her father dead and cold; and her mother said she was dying from suffoca- tion, and she did die shortly afterwards. The daughter was unable to rise from the bed, or to disentangle herself from her dead father until late in the day. She screamed; but it was not till five p.m. that she was able to walk downstairs and give the alarm. On post-mortem examination next day, the body of the man was found lying on the right side in a composed attitude. On the right thigh were two patches of dried blood, and one on the right wrist, which lay close to the thigh. There were several bruises on the body. The heart-cavities contained small clots and a little dark blood. The body of the woman had the skin of the face and the front of the body of a purplish hue, and the nose and lips were swollen as if from a blow. The internal organs were healthy. The heart contained some thin fluid blood, but no clots. The blood of the man was examined, and found to contain distinct traces of carbonic oxide gas. (' Med. Chron.,' vol. ii., p. 80.) Full details of the post-mortem appearances met with in poisoning by coke-fumes and the vapours of burning charcoal, are given by La Harpe ('Kev. M^d. de la Suisse Rom.,' 1885, p. 101), and by Culling- worth (' Med. Chron.,' ii. p. 80).


[491/872 b22652516_0491.jp2]

VAPOURS OF LIME AND BRICK KILNS. COAL-GAS. Analysis.—Sulphurous acid is immediately known by its powerful and suffocating odour, which resembles that of burning sulphur. The best test for its presence is a mixture of iodic acid and starch, which speedily acquires a blue colour when exposed to the vapour. Vapours of Lime, Brick, and Cement Kilns. Gaseous Products from Lime-hurning.—In the burning of lime, car- bonic acid is given out abundantly; but owing to the nature of the fuel used, carbonic oxide and sulphurous acid are mixed with it. Persons who have incautiously slept in the neighbourhood of a burning lime- kiln during a winter^s night have been destroyed by the respiration of these vapours. The discovery of a dead body in such a situation would commonly suffice to indicate the real cause of death ; but a practitioner ought not to be the less prepared to show that there existed no other apparent cause of death about the person. It is obvious that a person might be murdered, and the body placed subsequently near a kiln by the murderer in order to avert suspicion. If there are no marks of external violence, the stomach should be carefully examined for poison. In the absence of all external and internal injuries, medical evidence will avail but little; for a person might be criminally suffocated, and his body, if found under the circumstances above stated, would present scarcely any appearances upon which a medical opinion could be securely based. The vapours of brick-kilns are equally deleterious, the principal agent being carbonic acid mixed with carbonic oxide ; although, accord- ing to the stage of combustion of the fuel, ammonia, hydrochloric acid, sulphuretted hydrogen, and sulphurous acid may be evolved. In 1842, two boys were found dead on a brick-kiln near London, whither they had gone for the purpose of roasting potatoes. Although the cause of death in both cases wa,s clearly suffocation, in one instance the body was extremely livid, while in the other there was no lividity whatever. Such accidents are frequent. In 1878, an inquest was held at Islington on the body of a man who was found dead on a brick-kiln. There were no bums on the body. A post-mortem examination showed that he had died from suffocation by the noxious gases evolved from the kiln. The vapours of cement-hilns are as noxious as those of brick-kilns : carbonic and sulphurous acids predominate in them. Coal-Gas. Coal-gas is a compound which acts directly as a poison when respired. Many fatal accidents have occurred from the respiration of air con- taminated with it. Its composition is subject to much variation, according to circumstances. An analysis of coal-gas as supplied to London showed that it contained per cent.—of hydrogen, 46*43 ; of light carburetted hydrogen, 38-93; carbonic oxide, 5-62; defiant gas, 3-86; watery vapour, 2-48; nitrogen, 2*22; carbonic acid, 0-46. The differences in composition depend on the heat to which the gas has been submitted. Poleck found, in four series of experiments in


[492/872 b22652516_0492.jp2]

COAL-GAS. SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES. 480 which death was caused in rabbits by the gaseous products of com- bustion of pit-coal, that the air of the chamber had a mean compo- sition in 100 parts of 6-56 carbonic acid, 0-46 carbonic oxide, 13-4 oxygen, and 79*58 nitrogen. In experiments made with coal-gas the gaseous mixture which caused the death of the animal was always found explosive. He agrees with many others that carbonic oxide is the poisonous agent in coal-gas, except in those cases in which it is largely contaminated with sulphuretted hydrogen gas. In poisoning by charcoal-vapour the effects are due to carbonic acid, carbonic oxide, and the diminution of oxygen. There is no doubt that the hydro- carbons also have a specially noxious influence, although the use of the safety-lamp in mines proves that a mixture of marsh-gas with air in an explosive proportion, may be breathed for a certain time without producing serious effects. Symptoms and Appearances after Death.—The symptoms produced by coal-gas, when mixed in a large proportion with air, are—giddi- ness, headache, nausea with vomiting, confusion of intellect, loss of consciousness, general weakness and depression, partial paralysis, con- vulsions, and the usual phenomena of asphyxia. The appearances after death will be understood from the following cases. A family residing at Strasburg breathed for forty hours an atmosphere con- taminated with coal-gas, which had escaped from a pipe passing near the cellar of the house in which they lodged. On the discovery of the accident, four of the family were found dead. The father and mother still breathed. In spite of treatment, the father died in twenty-four hours; but the mother recovered. When the five bodies were in- spected, there was a great difference in the appearances; but the principal changes observed were congestion of the brain and its membranes—the pia mater being gorged with blood, and the whole surface of the brain intensely red. In three of the cases there was an effusion of coagulated blood on the dura mater and in the spinal canal. The lining membrane of the air-passages was strongly injected, and there was spread over it a thick viscid froth, tinged with blood; the substance of the lungs was of a bright-red colour, and the blood in the vessels was coagulated. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' Jan. 1842.) In two cases communicated by Teale (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1839, p. 106), there was found congestion of the brain and its membranes, with injection of the lining membrane of the air-passages ; and the blood was remarkably liquid. An aged woman and her granddaughter, who had been annoyed by the escape of gas during the day, retired to bed, and they were found dead about twelve hours afterwards. In 1873, four members of a family were found dead in their bedroom at Dundee. The mother, father, and two children had retired to rest quite well. There was a strong smell of coal-gas on entering the room, and they had un- doubtedly died from the effects of this gas while sleeping. Gas had been formerly supplied to the house, but it had been carelessly cut off, and some still leaked into the room. These facts show that life may be insidiously destroyed by the breathing of this gas without giving the slightest warning.


[493/872 b22652516_0493.jp2]

POISONING BY COAL-GAS. In the cases above related, the effects produced by coal-gas were owing to the long-continued breathing of it in a diluted state. The quantity contained in the air of the rooms must have been very small: in the first case it was probably not more than 8 or 9 per cent., be- cause at a little above this proportion the mixture with air becomes explosive; and there had been no explosion in this case, although in the apartment in which the persons were found dead, a stove had been for a long time in active combustion, and a candle had been completely burnt out. In Teale's cases those who first entered the house per- ceived a strong smell of coal-gas, but still the air could be breathed. The body of a gasfitter was found supported in a sitting posture on the floor. The man had accidentally breathed coal-gas mixed with air, while connecting a tube with a meter. The skin was cold, the cornea glazed, and the face pale and placid; there was some froth about the mouth, the pupils were rather dilated, and the limbs supple. There was a strong smell of gas in the place. He was working in a closet, and was found on the top of a pair of steps in a sitting posture—his head on one side, his arms hanging down, and his back leaning against the wall, in the attitude in which he had been engaged at his work. He had evidently died quietly and placidly on his seat, and had made no attempt to descend the steps. He M^as last seen alive an hour before he was found, and he no doubt died rapidly from the inhalation of the gas. An inspection of the body was made about twenty-four hours after death. The skin of the face and upper part of the body was pale, rigidity was well marked, and there was general lividity of the back of the body as well as of the limbs. The blood was everywhere fluid. The brain and its membranes were not congested, but were rather pale than other- wise; the ventricles contained a pale serum. There was a strong odour of coal-gas on exposing the brain. The lungs were of a dark-red colour, and did not collapse on raising the chest-bone ; they were dark at the back of the lobes from gravitation of blood; their structure was healthy. The windpipe and bronchi contained frothy mucus in some quantity. A powerful odour of gas was perceived on compressing the lungs. The heart was healthy ; the right cavities were distended with blood, and the left were nearly empty; the blood was everywhere dark- coloured. There was congestion of the abdominal viscera, but no other unusual appearance. (' Med.-Chir. Trans.,' 1862, vol. 45, p. 103.) In general the smell of gas may be perceived in the breath for some time after the person has been removed from the noxious atmosphere. In the Chantrelle trial at Edinburgh, May, 1878, the time for the disap- pearance of the odour in a person still living was an important question (p. 170). There are but few facts recorded on this subject. In one case, where sensibility was completely lost, the smell of the gas had entirely disappeared from the breath in two hours and a half after the man's recovery. ('Lancet,' 1878, i. p. 786.) Coal-gas, like other aerial poisons, may destroy life if long breathed, although so diluted as not to produce any serious effects in the first instance. This gas owes its peculiar odour to the vapour of naphtha ; 2 I


[494/872 b22652516_0494.jp2]

POISONING BY COAL-GAS. 482 the odour begins to be perceptible in air when the gas forms only the 1000th part; it is easily perceived when forming the 700th part, but the odour is strongly marked when it forms the 150th part. In most houses in which gas is burnt, the odour due to leakage is plainly per- ceived ; and it is a serious question whether health and life may not often be affected by the long-continued breathing of an atmosphere contain- ing but a small proportion. The odour will always convey a sufficient warning against its poisonous effects. It should be known that this gas will penetrate into dwellings in an insidious manner. In Teale's cases (see p. 480, ante), the pipe from which the gas had escaped was situated about ten feet from the wall of the bedroom where the women slept; the gas had permeated through the loose earth and rubbish, and had entered the apartment through the floor. We have notes of several other cases in which coal-gas has thus destroyed life by slow leakage into bedrooms. In one of these a gas-pipe passing under the floor had been left imperfectly stopped during repairs. This led to the death of two ladies sleeping in the room above with closed doors and windows. In another, the leakage was owing to a carpenter hammering nails through the floor. Some of these had penetrated a concealed gas-pipe, and led to an escape sufficient to prove fatal to a person sleeping in the room. In a third case, a leakage had been caused by rats gnawing a hole in the thin pipe in which gas is conveyed in houses. Four persons suffered severely by this accident, and barely escaped with their lives. There is another cause of leakage which may lead to accident. When gas is burnt during the night in a closed bedroom, the flame may be extinguished by a current of air. This would lead to a subsequent escape, which might prove fatal. The action of this gas on the brain and nervous system is so insidious that a person is rendered powerless before he is conscious of danger. Coal-gas is the agent now employed for the destruction of stray dogs in Paris. Patenko has examined the bodies of animals thus destroyed. The appearances met with are generally those of suffoca- tion {q.v.); and the blood, more especially in the liver, is of a rosy hue, as in poisoning by carbonic oxide. (' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1885,1.1, p. 209.) It is impossible to determine exactly what proportion of this gas in air will prove fatal. An atmosphere containing from 7 to 12 per cent, has been found to destroy dogs and rabbits in a few minutes; when the proportion was from 1^ to 2 per cent., it had little or no effect. With respect to man, it may destroy life if long respired when forming about 9 per cent.; i.e. when it is in less than an explosive proportion. (See 'Brit, and For. Med. Rev.,' vol. 20, p. 253; also ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1830, t. 1, p. 457 ; and 'Edin. Med. Jour.,' July, 1874, p. 23.) Aldis observed in his experiments that in ordinary coal-gas mixed with air, rats were rendered insensible in half a minute, and. died in a minute and a half to two minutes. There was before death. a spasmodic action of the diaphragm. The gas was allowed to enter slowly into a bell-jar of air in which the animals were placed. (' Med.- • Chir. Trans.,' 1862, vol. 45, p. 100.)


[495/872 b22652516_0495.jp2]

WATER-GAS. A person may die from respiring a mixture of unburnt gas, as well as of the products of its combustion. It is not unusual to find the gas burning in a room in which a person has been asphyxiated. A youth, set. 18, went to bed in a small room without a fireplace or means of ventilation, in which was a sliding gasalier with two jets. He was found in the morning insensible ; the sliding gasalier had been drawn down as far as possible, and one of the jets was burning with the cock turned on full. There was a strong smell of unburnt gas in the room, which had escaped from the sliding tube. When seen he was completely comatose, breathing irregularly; the face was livid, the pupils natural and sensible to light; body-temperature, 102° F. The pillow was stained with a brownish fluid issuing from the mouth. In spite of treatment, he continued in much the same state for nearly three, days, when his temperature rose to 106°. The pulse was imperceptible the pupils dilated and insensible. Death took place sixty-eight hours after he was found. On inspection, the vessels of the surface of the brain were full of blood; small clots appeared on making a section of it. The right auricle of the heart was full of dark blood, fluid and coagulated. The surface of the lungs was of a dark claret colour, mottled with pink spots. The lungs were full of dark blood, and sec- tions of them presented a mottled appearance, like the pleural surface. The bronchial tubes were free—the inner surface was of a dark purple colour. The kidneys were congested. ('Brit. Med. Jour.,' 1875, ii. p. 392.) Water-Gas. Kecent successful attempts to introduce water-gas into this country and into the United States of America, as a heating and illuminating agent, have given rise to serious accidents. Water-gas, made by passing steam over hot coke, is essentially a mixture of hydrogen and carbonic oxide gases, and contains about 40 per cent, of the latter gas. It is odourless, and highly poisonous. Many fatal accidents have occurred in the United States of America from its escape into the air of rooms. On Nov. 20, 1889, two forgemen, French and Fenwick, occu- pied a cabin in which there was a cooking stove heated by water-gas. By an accident the gas was extinguished, the tap being left partially turned on. In the course of the day they were found dead, as if asleep. Two days later the bodies were examined by several medical men in a room of 39,000 cubic feet capacity, and receiving perhaps 1000 cubic feet of fresh air per minute. Before the bodies were well opened, several of those engaged were affected by the gas, which was escaping into the room, and one seriously. All recovered. Two days after this, and four days after the deaths occurred, the editor assisted at the post- mortem examinations, which had been abandoned on the previous occasion. The appearances were typical of those from carbonic oxide poisoning, viz. a rosy hue of the viscera and of the post-mortem hypostases (ecchymoses), a fresh appearance of the viscera, an exudation of rosy blood-stained fluid into the stomach, bladder, and cranial cavity.


[496/872 b22652516_0496.jp2]

484 CONFINED AIR. The rosy hue of portions of the viscera was clearly visible seventeen months later, though the organs were simply kept in glass-stoppered bottles. The blood also retained its rosy hue for many weeks, and throughout this time showed the two absorption bands of carbonic oxide haemoglobin. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.,' 1889, p. 223.) Confined Aik. Symptoms and Effects.—An animal confined within a certain quantity of air, which it is compelled to breathe, will soon die. A human being in the same way may be sufibcated, if confined in a close apartment where the air is not subject to change or renewal, while the products of respiration are accumulated; and the effects are hastened when a number of persons are crowded together in a small space. The change which air, thus contaminated by breathing, undergoes may be very simply stated. The quantity of nitrogen in 100 parts will remain nearly the same; the quantity of oxygen will probably vary from 8 to 12 per cent., while the remainder will be made up chiefly of carbonic acid. If many persons are crowded together, the air will acquire a high temperature, and it will be saturated with aqueous vapour which con- tains decomposing animal matter derived from the lungs and skin. From this statement, it is evident that air which has been contaminated by continued breathing will operate fatally on the human body, partly in consequence of its being deficient in oxygen, and partly from the noxious effects of the carbonic acid and other substances contained in it. The proportion in which carbonic acid exists in respired air is subject to variation: according to the experiments of Allen and Pepys, it never exceeds 10 per cent, by volume of the mixture, how frequently soever it may have been received into and expelled from the lungs. The influence of respiration on air may be thus stated: An adult consumes from one (277 cubic inches) to two gallons of air per minute, and the air expired contains from 4 to 5 per cent, of carbonic acid; but when a person continues to breathe the same air, the proportion of carbonic acid expelled is reduced at each successive expiration. When the amount in air has reached 10 or 12 per cent., no more is thrown ofi" by the lungs, and the blood is no longer depurated. For healthy existence an adult consumes 20 cubic feet, or 125 gallons, of air per hour. A common candle will consume as much as two gallons of air per minute. These facts are of importance in reference to the size of bedrooms occupied by the poorer classes. The rooms are often small, without ventilation by door, window, or chimney, and fatal accidents, especially to children, are hkely to arise from a number sleeping in the same room. Parkes calculated in reference to sleeping-rooms that the mini- mum cubic space required for boys and girls from fourteen to sixteen years of age should not be less than 500 cubic feet, and above that age from 600 to 800 cubic feet should be allowed per head. In 1878 a woman and six children were found dead in their bedroom at Liver- pool. The whole capacity of the room was only equal to 512 cubic feet, i.e. about sufficient for one person. In this case a bucket with


[497/872 b22652516_0497.jp2]

NITROUS OXIDE. burning coke (see p. 478) had been placed in the centre of the room, the door and windows closed, and there was no flue to carry oft the coke-vapour. This was, perhaps, the principal cause of death, as the coke must have rapidly exhausted the small quantity of air in the room. Dalton found that the air in crowded rooms, such as theatres, contained one per cent, of carbonic acid, the atmospheric proportion (1-2500th) being therefore increased twenty-fivefold. The author found a similar proportion in the impure air taken from Cornish mines, at a depth of about 1400 feet. The coarse candles used by miners vitiate as much air as the breathing of an adult, and there is an absence of any proper means of ventilation. It is certain that insensibility and death would ensue in a human adult before the whole of the oxygen of the confined air had disappeared; but the opportunity can rarely present itself of analyzing such a contaminated mixture, and hence it is im- possible to specify the exact proportion in which carbonic acid would exist when the confined air proved fatal to persons who had respired it. The carbonic acid in the air of close rooms does not gravitate to the floor, but is diffused throughout. The whole mass of air is in fact vitiated, and requires renewal. (' Lond. Med. Gaz.,' vol. xxxviii. p. 351; see also * Report on Mines,' 1864, App, B, p. 196; and ' Chem. News,' 1865, i. p. 79.) Nitrous Oxide. Some cases of death from the inhalation of this gas as an anaesthetic renders a short notice of it necessary in this place. Davy was the first to show by experiments on himself that, under certain precautions, it might be breathed when mixed with air without danger to life, and that it had the effect of producing an agreeable species of intoxication. In 1873, it was administered by a dentist at Exeter to a lady, set. 38, at her own desire, in order to annul pain during the extraction of a molar tooth. A physician carefully examined her before the operation, and found that there was nothing to preclude the use of the gas. The nitrous oxide was pure: it had been safely used for other patients from the same condenser, and an apparatus was so arranged as to secure the removal of the expired air. The total quantity administered was about six gallons. This could not be regarded as an overdose. Davy himself breathed with safety five gallons in one of his early experiments. Soon after the commencement of the inhalation, it was observed that the pulse became rapid and less full, indicating an action on the heart; the patient was then sensible, and the apparatus was removed. The operation was commenced, but the lady insisted on having the gas again. She took it; insensibility came on, and the operation was completed. Immediately afterwards the face became livid, the features began to swell, and the tongue protruded. In spite of every effort to restore her, she did not recover from the state of insensibihty; she breathed two or three times, and the pulse then ceased. No inspection of the body was made. The above-mentioned facts were given in evidence at the coroner's inquest, and the medical opinion was that death had been caused by the gas in producing
