

[1/1290 b21964944_0001.jp2]




[2/1290 b21964944_0002.jp2]




[3/1290 b21964944_0003.jp2]

II.


[4/1290 b21964944_0004.jp2]




[5/1290 b21964944_0005.jp2]

MEDICAL JaPJSPRUDENCE.


[6/1290 b21964944_0006.jp2]

LOXDOS rnlSTKD BY 8P0TT18W00DE ASD CO- JTEW-STUEKT SQUARE


[7/1290 b21964944_0007.jp2]

THE PRINCIPLES AND PEACTICE OF MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE. BY ALFEED SWAINE TAYLOE, M.D., F.E.S. FBLLOW OF THE ROYAL COLLEGE OP PHYSICIANS, AND rUOFESSOK OP MEDICAL JURISrUUDENCE AND CHEMISTRY IK GUY'S HOSPITAL. I{t^<ji;RT» ONITAS. IN DOBIIS LIBERTAS. IN OMNIBD3 VERITAS. bi* ..^-v C LONDON: JOHN CHURCHILL & SONS, NEW BUELINGTON STEEET. MDCCCLXV.


[8/1290 b21964944_0008.jp2]

Digitized by the Internet Archive in 2015 https://archive.org/details/b21964944


[9/1290 b21964944_0009.jp2]

PREFACE. The Manual of Medical JuiuspnunENCE has been for twenty years before the Profession, during which time it has passed through seven large editions. The increase of matter with each successive edition has at length rendered it necessary to revise the plan of the work, and the present volume is the result of this revision. In addition to the subjects which have been hitherto treated in the Manual, others have been introduced, so as to give a more complete and extended view of the Principles and Practice of Medical Jurisprudence. Among the new subjects which find a place in this volume are :—The Signs and Phenomena of Death, with an account of the Changes which take place in the Dead Body; Putrefaction in Air and Water, and its conditions; the Identity of Bones, Skeletons, and Mutilated Eemains; Sudden Death; the Presumption of Survivorship; Spontaneous Combustion; Life Insurance and Medical Evidence. In addition to these subjects new facts and cases have been added to every section of the work, the greater part of which has been rewritten. Engravings have been intro- duced into those chapters which admitted of illustration. Under the subject of Poisoning, the crystalline forms of mineral and organic poisons have been engraved from specimens observed with the microscope: the leaves and seeds of poisonous plants are also represented, the leaves being engraved from photographic copies of the natural leaves, showing their complete form and structure, and the seeds of their natural size and shape, as well as magnified. Under M^odnds, illustrations of the principal organs and cavitie.s


[10/1290 b21964944_0010.jp2]

vi PREFACE. are given, so as to render the description of wounds by medical witnesses more intelligible to members of the legal profession. Other subjects, which it is here unnecessary to specify, will also be found to have their appropriate illustrations. The small volume will be republished as hitherto, to serve as a Manual for the use of students of Law and Medicine. 15 St. James's Teeeace, Eegent's Park: September 1865.


[11/1290 b21964944_0011.jp2]

CONTENTS. « MEDICAL EVIDENCE. The practice of Medical Jurisprudence—Medical and modico-lcgul duties contrasted —Medical reports — Coroners' inquests — Inspections—Medical witnesses — Trial at the Assizes—Subpoenas — Examination in chief — Cross-examination and Re- examination—Quotations from books—Presence of witnesses in Court—Rules for the delivery of evidence—^IVIedical experts—Medical counsel—Conflicting medical testimony. QUESTIONS CONNECTED WITH THE DEAD BODY. CHAPTERS 1—3. Indications and proofs of death—Coldness—Rigidity—Position of tlie body—Apparent death—Death-trance—Inference of the time of death before putrefaction—Presump- tions of suicide or murder from the state of the body . . pages 1—4S CHAPTERS 4—7. Putrefaction in air and water—Chemical changes in the dead body—Production of adipocere—Effects of putrefaction mistaken for violence—Presumption of the time of death—Identity of mutilated bodies—Of skeletons—Age—Sex—Period of inter- ment—Human and animal bones—Sudden death—Priority of death—Presumption of survivorship ...... pages 49—128 POISONING. CHAPTERS 8—11. Definition of a poison—Habit and idiosyncrasy—Varieties of poisons—Evidence of poisoning in the living—Chronic poisoning—Evidence of poisoning in the dead — Rules for the inspection of bodies—Identity of substances for analysis—Notes— Medico-legal reports ..... pages 129—159


[12/1290 b21964944_0012.jp2]

Vlli CONTENTS. CHAPTERS 12—21. Mineral irritant poisons—Sulphuric, Nitric, and Hydrochloric acids—Oxalic, Tartaric, and Acetic acids—Alkaline poisoning—Potash, Soda, and Ammonia—Saline irritants — Nitrate and Sulphate of potash — Iodide of potassium — Salts of Baryta — Phosphorus—Arsenic and its compounds—Mercury—Corrosive sublimate and other mercurial salts—Compounds of lead, copper, antimony, zinc, iron,<ind other metals— Thallium—Iodine ...... pages 160—262 CHAPTERS 22—23. Vegetable irritants—Aloes—Savin—Croton-oil—Colchicum—HcUebore —Animal irri- tants—Spanish flies—Noxious animal food—Trichina spiralis—Trichiniasis—Dis- eased and putrescent food—Poisoned game . . . pages 262—283 CHAPTERS 24—27. Narcotic or cerebral poisons—Opium and its compounds—Morphia—Prussic acid— Cyanide of potassium—Essential oil of almonds—Sulphide of carbon—Coal and wood- naphtha—Amylene—Fusel-oil — Benzole — Nitrobenzole—Aniline—Wormwood-oil —Alcohol—Ether—Cliloroform—Camphor—Tobacco—Cocculus indicus—Pierotox- ine—Darnel—Calabar bean—Mushrooms—Henbane—Lactucarium—Woody night- shade ....... PAGES 283—330 CHAPTERS 28—30. Spinal and cerebro-spinal poisons—Nux vomica—Strychnia—Brucia—Hemlock— Conia—Cicuta—QDnanthe—^thusa cynapium—Aconite or Monkshood—Aconi- tina—Belladonna or Deadly nightshade—Atropia—Lobelia—Foxglove—Digitaline —Thornapple or Datura—Daturia—Laburnum—Yew—Privet pages 331—373 WOUNDS AND PEESONAL INJUEIES. CHAPTERS 31—35. Medical and legal definitions of a wound—Wounds causing danger to life—Grievous bodily harm—Examination of wounds—Characters in the living and dead body— Varieties of wounds—Evidence of the use of a weapon—What are weapons? Wounds indicative .of homicide, suicide, or accident—Eyidence of homicide from situation, extent, and direction—Evidence from the position of the body and the weapon—Bloodstains ..... pages 374 443 CHAPTERS 36—43. Chemical and microscopical examination of bloodstains and of stains resembling them —Blood on weapons—Arterial and venous blood—Blood of man and animals—Self- intlicted wounds—Cause of death from wounds—Loss of blood—Shock—Death of wounded persons from latent disease—Fatality of wounds from erysipelas, tetanus, pyreraia, and other causes—Surgical treatment—Operations—Malapraxis Cicatrices of wounds—Power of locomotion after severe wounds , pages 443 518


[13/1290 b21964944_0013.jp2]

COXTEIS'TS. CHAPTERS 44—46. Wounds as they affect different parts of the body—The head—Concussion—Extravasa- tion of blood—The face—The spine—The chest—Lungs, heart, and hirge vessels—• Diaphragm—The abdomen—Wounds of the liver, spleen, and kidneys—Intestines, stomach, and bladder—Fractures and dislocations . . pages 518—oGi CHAPTERS 4.7—48. Gunshot wounds on the living and dead body—Medical evidence—Wounds from small- shot, wadding, and gunpowder—Burns and scalds—Symptoms—Post-mortem appearances—Burns on the dead body—Wounds caused by fire—Burns by corrosive liquids ....... pages 565—594 SPONTANEOUS COMBUSTION. CHAPTER 49. Alleged spontaneotis combustion of the human body—Spontaneous combustion of vege- table and mineral substances—Iron pyrites—Conditions for the spontaneous com- bustion of cotton, hay, and other substances—Influence of oil and water—Alleged spontaneous combustion of flax, hemp, and jute — Cases requiring scientific evidence ....... pages 594—61G ASPHYXIA. CHAPTERS .^0-57. Drowning—Post-mortem appearances—Medical evidence of deatli from drowning— Hanging—Medical evidence—Marks of violence—Position of the body—Strangula- tion-Medical evidence of strangulation before and after death—Proofs of homicide —Suffocation, accidental or homicidal, a frequent caiise of sudden death— Smothering—Effects of carbonic aicd, sulphuretted hydrogen, and oilier gases and vapours—Death from lightning, cold, heat, and starvation . pages 616—747 PEEGNANCY AND DELIVEEY. CHAPTERS 58—64.' Medical proofs of pregnancy-Feigned pregnancy-Plea of pregnancy-Concealment of pregnancy-Impregnation in a state of unconsciousness-Evidence of pregnancy


[14/1290 b21964944_0014.jp2]

CONTENTS. X in the dead—Medical evidence of delivery in the living and dead body—Feigned delivery—Unconscious delivery— Corpora lutea—Concealment of birth—Criminal abortion by instruments and drugs—Medical proofs of abortion — Specific abor- tives — Ergot of rye — Savin — Feigned abortion — Evidence of live-birth—Post- mortem births—Minority and majority—Monsters . . pages 747—809 LEGITIMACY AND PATERNITY. CHAPTERS 63—67. Natural period of gestation—Short and protracted periods—Medical evidence from the state of the child—Disputed paternity—Evidence from parental likeness—Posthimious children—Superfoetation—Superconception—Sexual malformation—Impotency from disease or accident—^Duration of proereative power in the male—Puberty—Virility —Crypsorchides and monorchides—Sterility—Duration of proereative power in the female—Female precocity—Legitimacy and divorce . . pages 810—88-1 INFANTICIDE. CHAPTERS 68—76. Uterine age or maturity of the child—Rules for the inspection of the body—Medical proofs of life in a new-born child, before and after respiration — Condition of the lungs—Test of Ploucquet—The hydrostatic test—Mode of employing it—Inferences derived from it—Atelectasis and disease of the lungs—Floating of the lungs from putrefaction—Artificial inflation—Imperfect respiration—Respiration before birth Proofs of a child having been born alive—Evidence from changes in the fcetal vessels—Detection of food, blood, and meconium in the stomach—Medical evidence of surdvorship in new-born children — Causes of death — Natural and violent- Criminal and accidental—Suifocation—Drowning—Cold- Star\'ation or privation of food—Wounds—Fractures of the skull—Accidental fractures during delivery Sudden delivery—Strangulation—Poisoning . . , pages 88-i 988 RAPE. CHAPTERS 77—78. Medical evidence of rape on infanta and children—Marks of violence on the body and genital organs-Purulent discharges from natural causes mistaken for evidence of rape-Rape on girk after puberty-Defloration-Medical proofs of sexual inter- course-Rape on married women-Disappearance of physical evidence^Prognnncy following rape-Evidence of violation on the dead-Sodomy pages 989-1018


[15/1290 b21964944_0015.jp2]

CONTENTS. xi INSANITY. CHAPTEES 79—86. Medical and legal definitions of insanity—Moral insanity—Unsoundness of mind— 'Non compos mentis'—Symptoms of incipient insanity—Hallucinations and illusions —Liicid intervals—Mania—Effects of cold on maniacs—Abstinence—Monomania— Delusions—Delirium—Eccentricity—Suicid.ilmania-—Suicide and insanity—Demen- tia—Idiocy—Imbecility—Hereditary transmission of insanity—Feigned insanity— Appearances after death—Legal and illegal imposition of restraint—Certificates of insanity—Discharge of lunatics—Testimonial capacitj-—Commissions of lunacy— Examination of alleged lunatics—Medical and legal tests of competency—Evidence from writing—Insanity in reference to marriage, deeds, and contracts — Testa- mentary capacity—Eccentricity in wills—Criminal responsibility of the insane—• Plea or defence of insanity in criminal cases—Homicidal mania—Medical and legal tests of responsibility—Puerperal mania—PjTomania—Kleptomania—Erotomania —Aidoiomania—Dipsomania — Eesponsibility of drunkards—Delirium tremens— Somnambulism—The deaf and dumb . . . pages 1019—1134 LIFE INSUEANCE. CHAPTER 87. Principles of life insurance—Medical questions in reference to the insurance of lives —What diseases have and what have not a tendency to shorten life—Concealment of diseases—Of habits—"Wliat is material concealment?—Intemperance—Delirium tremens — Epilepsy—Abstinence — Vegetarianism — Opium-eating— Insanity— Voidance of policies of insurance by suicide—Secret poisoning of persons whose lives are insured ....... pages 1130—1165


[16/1290 b21964944_0016.jp2]




[17/1290 b21964944_0017.jp2]

ILLUSTRATIONS. . PACK Romains of Dr. Parkman restoi-ed ...... S8 Waterloo Bridge ease,' remains restored ..... 89 Crystals of nitre magnified ....... 172 Crystals of oxalic acid magnified . . . . . 177 Crystals of acid oxalate of potash, magnified . . . . I79 Crystals of nitrate of soda. . ..... 182 Crystals of chloride of barium ...... 190 Figs. 1, 2, 3. Eeduction tubes with sublimates of metallic arsenic and arsenious acid. Fig. 4. Arsenical sublimate magnified, showing the octahedral crystals 202 Crystals of arsenious acid by sublimation ..... 203 Crystals of arsenious acid fi'om a solution in water . . . 203 Deposit from Marsh's process ...... 205 Apparatus for separating arsenic from organic substances by distillation . 208 Apparatus for testing the chloride of arsenic obtained by distillation . 209 Portion of tube with metallic sublimate ..... 209 Tube apparatus for testing chloride of arsenic .... 210 Flask and funnel employed in te.sting substances by Reinsch's process . 212 Crystals of corrosive sublimate obtained by sublimation . . , 226 Crystals of corrosive sublimate from an aqueous solution . . . 227 Metallic mercury sublimed in globules from corrosive sublimate . . 227 The same magnified ....... 227 Galvanic pile of gold and zinc foil for separating mercury in solution . 227 Magnified sublimate of mercury from the ti.ssues .... 229 Mixed sublimate of mercury and arsenious acid, magnified . . 229 Crystals of acetate of lead magnified . . • . . 237 Crystals of tartar emetic magnified ..... 2r)l Crystals of bichromate of potash magnified .... 260 Tips of the leaves of savin magnified ..... 264 Crystals of cantharidine from a solution in chloroform . . . 273 Crystals of cantharidine from a solution in ether .... 273 Magnified view of the Trichina spiralis in its capsule . . . 278 Human muscle containing trichinse, natural size . ... 278 The same magnified . . . • . . . 279 The Trichina spiralis detached from its capsule, magnified . . 279 Crystals of morphia . . • ■ . . 293 Crystals of cyanide of silver ...... 299 Apparatus for the detection of chloroform-vapour . . . 319 Berry and kernel of Cocculus indicus . • . . . 323 Crystals of picrotoxine 324 Bearded darnel (Lolium temulentum) ..... 32o


[18/1290 b21964944_0018.jp2]

xiv ILLUSTRATIONS. PAGE Calabar bean ^'^^ OOQ Leaf and seeds of lieubane Seeds of Nux vomica Hairs of Niix vomica seeds, magnified ..... 337 Crystals of strychnia (fig. 1) from alcoholic solution . . . 338 Prismatic crystals of strychnia, from the sulphate; . • • 338 Crystals of sulphocyanate of strychnia ..... 339 Crystals of chromate of strychnia ..... 339 Crystals of salicine 339 Crystals of santoninc ....... 339 Crystals of sulphate of brucia ...... 346 Leaves and seeds of hemlock ...... 347 Leaves and seeds of parsley ...... 348 Leaves and seeds of OEnanthe crocata ..... 361 Leaves and seeds of ^thusa cynapium .... 352 The roots of monkshood or aconite and horseradish . . . 356 Leaves and seeds of aconite ...... 357 Leaves and seeds of deadly nightshade or belladonna . . • 359 Crystals of sulphate of atropia ...... 360 Seeds of Lobelia inflata, natural size and magnified . . . 362 Leaves and seeds of foxglove or digitalis .... 363 Seeds of Datura stramonium ...... 369 Seeds of Datura alba ....... 369 Leaf of stramonium . . . . . . • 370 Crystals of daturia ....... 370 Leaf and seeds of laburnum . . . . . . 371 Leaves of yew ........ 373 Fibres of cotton magnified ...... 429 Fibres of linen, silk, and woollen, magnified .... 429 Fibres of ancient woollen and ancient linen, magnified . . 429 Human hair and hair of the eyebrow . . . . 430 Human hair with its tubular sheath ..... 431 Hair of the spaniel, of the rabbit, hare, the horse, goat, fox, cow, and fallow-deer 431 Spots of arterial blood on the surface of a brick . . . ' . 452 Form of corpuscle of human blood ..... 454 Corpuscles of blood in linen fibre ..... 455 Human blood-corpuscles with fibrin ..... 455 Human blood-corpuscles as separated from a dried bloodstain . . 465 Corpuscles of human blood as seen in water .... 456 Corpuscles of blood as seen in a solution of sulphate of soda . . 466 Blood-corpuscles of the dog, mouse, rabbit, ass, cow, pig, ox, cat, horse, sheep, the common fowl, and salamander . . . . . 453 HsEmatin and htemine crystals of animal blood .... 459 The same from human blood ...... 460 Crystals from dried blood . . . . . . 460 Hsematin crystals from the human blood, and the blood of the bullock and sheep 460 Section of the skull-bones and the three membranes which cover the brain 631 Section of the brain, showing the ventricles .... 532 Lateral view of the entire brain, showing the hemispheres and the convolutions the cerebellum, medulla oblongata, and commencement of the spinal marrow 632 Front view of the viscera of the chest, showing the relative position of the lung.?, heart, and great bloodvessels , . . , . 547


[19/1290 b21964944_0019.jp2]

XV ILLUSTKATIONS. PAGE View of the under surface of the liver, showing the position of the loLos, gall- bladder, and blood-vessels ...... 652 View of the stomach in section, with the whole of the small and large intestines 555 The liver, stomach, duodenum, pancreas, and spleen, in their relative positions 655 Suicidal hanging in the erect posture. Case of the Prince de Condt^ . 669 Suicidal hanging in a reclined posture ..... 670 Suicidal hanging in a kneeling posture . . . . . 671 Case of accidental strangulation ...... 680 Case of homicidal strangulation, Eeg. v. Pinckard .... 684 Ovary with corpus luteum ...... 769 Section of ovary with corpus luteum, second month . . . 770 Section of ovary with corpus luteum, full term .... 770 The ovum and membranes at one month . . . . 773 The embryo and membranes at six weeks . . . . 773 The embryo and membranes at the second month . . . 77'! The ergot of rye, and a magnified section .... 785 View of the organs of the chest in a new-bom child before breathing . 895 View of the organs after perfect breathing .... 895 Atelectasis of the lungs in a new-born child .... 904 View of the lungs artificially inflated . . . . . 914 View of the lungs imperfectly distended with air by respiration . . 916 Appearance of the umbilical cord in a new-born child . . . 927 Front view of the heart of an infant five days old . . . 929 Heart of the new-born child with the arterial duct before and after breathing 929 View representing the arterial duct before and after breathing, and in adult life 930 The foramen ovale in the heart of a child before and after breathing . • 934 Granules of wheat-starch and granules of arrowroot . . . 936 Oil-globules of human and cow's milk, and of colostrum . , 937 Tesselatcd epithelial scales ...... 938 Human blood-corpuscles ....... 938 Microscopical appearances of meconium ..... 940 The skull of the new-boni child. The vertex and a lateral view . . 960 Fracture of the fcetal skull during delivery . . . 962 Microscopical appearance of mucous discharges .... 999 Pus and mucus magnified ...... 999 Pus from a chancre with vibrios ...... 999 Spermatozoa ........ 1013 Spermatozoa from stains two years old . . . . . 1013 Pus-globiUes with trichomonas ...... 1015 Varieties of epithelium . * . . • • . 1016 Menstrual blood magnified . . . • • . 1016 Portrait of a woman affected with demonomania .... 1028 Portrait of a woman in a fit of mania ..... 1029 Aspect of a girl in a fit of mania. The same on recovery (in a lucid interval) 1030 Portrait of a woman in a state of dementia .... 1044 Portrait of a male idiot ....... 1044


[20/1290 b21964944_0020.jp2]

CORRIGENDA. At page 177, IStli line from top, for 'twenty-three' read 'thirteen.' 339, illustration, Fig. 4, for ' 24' read ' 124 ' diameters. ,, 359, 25th line from foot, dele ' somewhat.' ,, 361, 10th line from top, for ' like ' read ' unlike.' ,, 414, 15th line from foot, for 'was' read ' were.' „ 417, last line, after ' hand' insert the words ' of the deceased.' „ 422, 17th line fi-om top, for 'failed' read ' fallen.' „ 423, 22nd line from top, dele the comma after the word ' any.' „ 442, 9th line from top, for ' Fluek' read ' Flack.' 453, 24th line from top, for ' spinal cords ' read ' spinal cord.' „ 480, 18th line from top, for ' eiFect' read ' etFects.' „ 601, 6th line from foot, for 'Med. Jour.' read 'Med. Jur.' ,, 607, 25th line from top, for 'statements' read ' statement.' 825, 15th line from top, for ' 1862' read ' 1863.' ,, 1056, 26th line from top, for 'repousible' read 'responsible.'


[21/1290 b21964944_0021.jp2]

MEDICAL EVIDENCE. THE PRACTICE OF MEDICAL JURISPRUDENCE MEDICAL AND MEDICO-LEGAL DUTIES CONTRASTED—MEDICAL REPORTS CORONERS* INQUESTS INSPECTIONS MEDICAL WITNESSES TRIAL AT THE ASSIZES SUBPtENAS—EXAMINATION IN CHIEF- CROSS-EXAMINATION AND RE-EXAMINATION QUOTATIONS FROM BOOKS PRESENCE OF WITNESSES IN COURT—RULES FOR THE DELIVERY OF EVIDENCE MEDICAL EXPERTS—MEDICAL COUNSEL—CONFLICTING MEDICAL TESTIMONY. Medical Jurisprudence—or, as it is sometimes called, Forensic, Legal, or State Medicine—may be defined to be that science which teaches the applica- tion of every branch of medical knowledge to the purposes of the law ; hence its limits are, on the one hand, the requirements of the law, and on the other, the whole range of medicine. Anatomy, physiology, medicine, surgery, chemistry, physics, and botany, lend their aid as necessity arises; and in some cases all these branches of science are required to enable a Court of Law to arrive at a proper conclusion on a contested question affecting life or property. Medical jurists are by no means agreed upon the exact boundaries of their science. Some authorities include forgery and coining, and all offences requiring purely chemical evidence; others include feigned diseases, nui- sances, and subjects connected with public health or sanitary legislation; while one German writer introduces the government and regulation of Temperance societies. Those who thus propose to enlarge the science forget the maxim, * Ars longa, vita brevis;' and they also forget that, by demanding too much of a medical practitioner, they may deter him from undertaking the study of that portion which may really prove serviceable to him in the prac- tice of his profession. The purpose of this work has been to bring as far as possible within a reasonable compass those subjects which especially demand inquiry, and which more particularly concern the duties of the educated physician and surgeon. The definition above given necessarily implies that a medical jurist should have a theoretical and practical knowledge of all branches of the profession, a large range of experience, and the rare power of adapting his knowledge and experience to emergencies. lie should be able to elucidate any difficult medico-legal question which may arise, and be prepared at all times a


[22/1290 b21964944_0022.jp2]

XVlll EXPEEIENCED rilYSICIANS AND to make a cautious selection of such medical facts, and a proper application of such medical principles, as may be necessary to enable a judge to place the subject in an intelligible liglit before the jury, and to enable a jury to arrive at a just conclusion. Medico-legal knowledge does not consist so much in the acquisition of facts as in the power of arranging them, and in applying the conclusions to which they lead to the piTrposes of the law. A man may be a most skilful surgeon, or a most experienced physician; his mind may be well stored with professional information; yet if he is imable by the use of simple language to make his ideas known to others, his knowledge will be of no avail. One far below him in professional standing and experience may make a better medical Avitness. The variety of subjects in which a medical jurist is required to have know- ledge and experience may well alarm a student of medicine, and lead him to suppose that, as he cannot make himself perfectly acquainted with all, he may well forego the labour of preparing himself in any. But this would be taking an erroneous view of his position. This description of the qualifica- tions necessary to constitute a normal witness in a Court of Law must not deter him from entering on the study. It is assuredly beyond the mental power of any individual that he should be at the same time profoundly versed in all the principles of medicine and jurisprudence, and that he should be able to answer all possible questions, and encounter and remove all medical difficulties that may occur during the trial of a civil or criminal case. All that the law expects from a medical man is a fjiir average knowledge not merely of his profession, but of that Avhich falls more peculiarly under the province of a medical witness. There can be no doubt that the more perfectly a man has made himself master of his profession, the better will he be fitted to follow the principles and apply himself to the practice of medical jurisprudence ; but he must divest himself of the notion that these principles can be spontaneously acquired, or that they are necessarily derived from the study of those isolated branches of medicine upon which medical jurisprxi- dence is based. The materials for the medical jurist undoubtedly exist in these collateral sciences: but they require to be assorted, selected, and moulded into shape, before they can be applied to any iiseful purpose. A man may be Avell qualified to practise as a physician or sm-geon, and yet find himself deficient Avhen called upon to act as a medical Avitness. There was no doubt that John Hunter stood in his time at the very head of his pro- fession, and that none could have profited more by industry and experience If sound professional knowledge could have qualified any man to act as a medical Avitness, Ave should assuredly be justified in pointing to him as an example; and yet this great man, Avhen summoned to give evidence on a memorable trial for poisoning, which occiu:red in 1781, Avas obliged to confess that he Avas unable to give a satisfactory ansAver to the important question put to him. John Hunter Avas the only professional Avitness called on the part of the prisoner to rebut the charge of poisoning the deceased by laurel Avater. His cross-examination, however, rather strengthened the case for the prosecution;


[23/1290 b21964944_0023.jp2]

SUEGEOXS AS WITNESSES. xix and the final question put by the Court was : * Give your opinion in the best manner you can, one Avay or the other, Avhetlier upon the whole of the symp- toms described, the death proceeded from the medicine (laurel water), or any other causes?'—A.' I do not mean to equivocate; but when I tell the sentiments of my own mind, what I feel at the time, I can give nothing decisive.' "With that candour which exists in all great minds, John Hunter admitted his defi- ciencies ; and he regretted to the latest period of his life that he had not di- rected more attention to subjects of this nature. It is perfectly clear from his answer that he should not have appeared in the case at all. In John Hunter's time medical jurisprudence was unknown; biit the want of it was clearly perceived. It was made apparent from the events of this remarkable trial {Jlex v. Dotiellan, Warwick Lent Assizes, 1781), that a peculiar kind of ex- perience was required to fit a medical man to act as a witness in a Court of Law,—that many loose principles existed in medicine, surgery, and chemistry, the fallacies of Avhich were quite unimportant so far as they related to medical practice, but which required to be closely sifted and thoroughly examined before they could be received as evidence in law. Medical men were then as now apt to confound what is mere matter of belief with proof In a Court of Law, however, the difference is soon made apparent. From the occurrence of this and similar cases, there was an obvious necessity for the creation of a distinct branch of science in which all medical facts and principles capable of serving as evidence should be aiTanged, developed, and explained. The duties of a medical jurist are distinct from those of a physician or siirgeon: the latter looks only to the treatment of disease or accident, and the saving of life; but the object of the former, in a large proportion of cases, is, whether in reference to the living or dead, to aid the law in fixing on the perpetrator of a crime, or to rescue an innocent person from a falsely imputed crime. Thus he may be required to determine whether, in a par- ticular case, the cause of death is natural or violent; and for this purpose it will be necessary for him to make an entirely new application of his pro- fessional knowledge. He has now the difficult task of making a selection from those parts of the medical sciences which bear upon the legal proof and development of crime. Some members of the medical profession have been inclined to look upon medico-legal practice as an unnecessary addition to their ordinary duties; but there are few who have been long engaged in the practice of the profes- sion who have not found themselves occasionally placed in situations of diffi- culty from the accidental occurrence of cases demanding medico-legal investi- gation. A medical man is summoned to attend a person labouring under the effects of poison criminally administered, but at the time ho may have no knowledge or even suspicion that poison is the cause of the symptoms. In spite of the best treatment, death ensues: here the functions of the medical man end, and those of a medical witness begin. It is utterly impossible that lie can noAv avoid giving evidence, or shift the responsibility on another—the law will insist upon his appearance, first in the Court of the coroner, and afterwards at the Assizes. It will here be assumed that as a registered member a 2


[24/1290 b21964944_0024.jp2]

XX MEDICAL CONTRASTED WITH of the profession he is fully competent to answer every question put to him by judge and counsel relative to the general effects of poisons ; the quantity of each required to destroy life; and the time within which a poison may prove fatal. It may be objected to his evidence, that the deceased had died from the effects of disease and not from poison, in which case the cross-exami- nation Avill lead to a searching inquiry into all those diseases which resemble poisoning in their symptoms and post-mortem appearances, as well as the means of making a certain distinction between them, and the fallacies to which the chemical processes for the detection of poison are liable. On another occasion, a medical man may be called to render assistance to one who has been stabbed in a quarrel, and who speedily dies from the wound. The office of the surgeon here ceases, while that of the medical jurist commences. He must now be prepared to answer numerous questions, all bearing upon the legal proof of crime—all necessary in law, although apparently superfluous in surgery. Thus he may be asked to state the precise characters of a Avound inflicted upon the body of a man soon after death, and by what means a particular woimd was inflicted. Was it homicidal or accidental ? The amount of blood lost? Whether the person could have moved or performed any act after receiving it ? Are certain red stains found upon his clothes, or upon a knife belonging to him, owing to effused blood or other causes ? Whether any and what statements were made by the dying man, and Avhat were the precise circumstances under which they Avere made ? (See p. 379.) It need hardly be observed that questions of this nature are rarely noticed, excejit in a cursory manner, by professors of chemistry and surgery, and a medical man is not likely to acquire the means of answering them by intuition. On the other hand, regarding ourselves as living in a civilized state, in Avhich the detection and punishment of crimes against life and property are indispensable to the security of all, it is impossible to overrate their importance. Unless a witness is able to return answers to these questions Avhen a public necessity occurs, a guilty man may escape punishment, while an innocent man may be condemned. He may thus most seriously injure his own reputation; for it is certain that his qualifications as a physician, surgeon, or general practitioner, however great, will not .shield him from general reprobation, . Thus, then, it is obvious that the duties of a medical jurist are of a highly responsible nature and of great importance to society, while the cases which call them into exercise are of purely accidental occurrence. A medical prac- titioner who thinks himself secure in the most retired corner of the kino-dom is liable to find himself suddenly summoned as a witness on a trial, to answer questions which perhaps during a long period of practice he had been led to re- gard as trifling and unimportant. Under the circumstances it is scarcely pos- sible that he can avoid exposing his deficiencies, and the final question will be Have you ever attended to or thought of these subjects before ? A neo-ative answer to this question, Avhile it commonly brings with it public censure will in most instances lead to the acquittal of the accused in spite of stronc^ presumptions of guilt. I have endeavoured to avoid overdrawing this picture ; its truth will, I am


[25/1290 b21964944_0025.jp2]

MEDICO-LEGAL OBSERVATION. xxi sure, be felt and acknowledged by those who have been a few years engaged in practice. The records of our law courts contain many unfortunate exposures, Avhich might have been easily avoided, had the witnesses only availed them- selves of the opportunities afforded to them of acquiring a knowledge of the subject; but they had unreflectingly acted on the principle, that medical jurisprudence was a dry, didl, and useless study, and that the practice of it was remote and speculative. This feeling is, however, fast disappearing. Those who have been compelled by circumstances to give their attention to it, have in subsequent cases taken care to prepare themselves for the ordeal through which every medical witness must pass. Some medical men who have treated legal medicine with indiiference have occasionally ventured to act as \\'itnesses, thinking that the subjects on which they were likely to be examined were so little known to judge and counsel, that even hazardous or rash statements would escape observation : such wit- nesses, hoAvever, have often found to their cost that they were labouring under a fatal delusion. Various circumstances have led, in recent times, to the acquisition of much medico-legal knowledge by lawyers, more especially in relation to questions connected with wounds, child-murder, and poisoning ; and they are not slow in detecting and exposing a mere pretender who attempts to shelter himself by vague or evasive statements and technical langu.age. There are few counsel engaged in any civil or criminal case of importance who do not take care to fortify themselves under medical advice, with a fidl knowledge of the views of standard medical writers on the subject in dispute ; and with these works before them, and with their proverbial acuteness, he must indeed be a clever witness who can succeed in passing off an erroneous or evasive answer to a medico-legal question. It is a frequent charge against members of the medical profession, that in a Court of Law they are the worst witnesses on matters of fact and opinion. I believe this to be an unmerited censure. Those who are ready to make this charge overlook the complexity and difficulty of the questions which are put to medical men compared with those put to other witnesses. They also forget that medical men are much more frequently summoned as witnesses than the members of the two other learned professions. Their evidence obtains much greater publicity, and is necessarily exposed to greater criticism. I was, on one occasion, present at a trial before the late Lord Truro, in which the action was between two members of the legal profession, and the witnesses on both sides were chiefly hamsters, solicitors, or solicitors' clerks. The questions put to the witnesses were so cleverly met and so technically evaded, that it w^as scarcely possible to obtain a consistent history of the most simple facts of the case. A direct answer could not be procured on any question, and the mode in which the witnesses gave their testimony elicited on several occasions rebukes from the learned judge. The fact is, that good and bad witnesses are to be met with in every profession ; under equal conditions there is no reason to suppose that one would furnish a greater number of incompetent witnesses than another. It is certainly the fault of medical men that they are not generally prepared for the questions which are


[26/1290 b21964944_0026.jp2]

MEDICAL CONTRASTED WITH xxii likely to arise in a case on wliicli they know they will be required to give evidence. This want of preparation frequently applies to facts as Avell as to opinions. Thus, in reference to a case in which a charge of mm-der or man- slaughter may be ultimately founded, a medical man who is called in omits to observe many circumstances bccaiise they appear to him to have little import- ance, although at the subsequent trial he may find, to his dismay, that they actually become the turning points of innocence or guilt. Medical observa- tion as a result of professional habits is, on these occasions, in general confined to only one set of circumstances—the recognition and treatment of disease; but medico-legal observation should take a much wider range than this, and should be directed to all the surrounding facts and incidents of a case. Tlic essential difference in the two kinds of practice is, that circumstances whicli are of no interest in a medical or surgical point of view are often of the greatest value and importance in legal medicine. It is obvious that if they are not observed by the medical witness when he is fii'st summoned to the injured person, whether dying or dead, it will be out of his power to meet many of the questions which must arise in the progress of the case. The non- observance of these facts is a serious evil, and often carries with it, althou"-h imjustly, an imputation of professional ignorance. The first duty, therefore, of a medical jurist is to cultivate a faculty of minute observation of medical and moral circumstances. This, when com- bined Avith a general knowledge of what the law requires as evidence, will enable him to meet in a satisfactory manner all the scientific questions that may be necessary for the elucidation of a case. The exercise of this faculty is by no means inconsistent with the performance of his duties as a surgeon. Some eminent professional men have been known to possess this power as a natural gift. I have elsewhere given a short notice of a case which occurred to the late Sir Astley Cooper (p. 425). He was called to see a man who, while sitting in his chair in a private room, had been mortally wounded by a pistol-shot from the hand of an unseen person. Sir Astley having done Avlaat Avas necessary respecting the wound, compared closely the direction from Avhich the pistol was fired with the position of the Avounded man and he came to the conclusion that the pistol must have been fired by a left-handed man. The only left-handed man known to be on the premises at the time Avas an intimate friend of the deceased, against Avhom there Avas no suspicion: but this observation led to his arrest and trial, and he Avas subsequently con- victed of this act of murder. The condition and position of the body of a person dead from wounds the position of a Aveapon, and the state of the dress and weapon, as Avcll as the form and direction of the woimd itself, are not always noticed with sufficient accuracy. It is, however, only right to say that many medical men in the present day show great acumen in their examination of these cases I Avas lately present at a trial for murder in Avhich the evidence showed that a man had been stabbed in the chest, and he died almost instantly from'a Avound m the heart. The act had been perpetrated by some c:nc in a crowd lu the dusk of the evening, but no one was seen to strike the blow and no


[27/1290 b21964944_0027.jp2]

xxiii MEDICO-LEGAL OBSERVATION. weapon was found near the spot. The surgeon observed that the wound in the chest was sliarp at one angle and rounded at tlie other, and he gave his opinion tliat the Avound had been inflicted with a knife having a sharp edge, and not with a dagger or double-edged knife. Within a few hours after tho occurrence, a man was arrested on suspicion, and a knife which he attempted to conceal was taken from him. It was in a sheath, and had at this time ivet blood upon it, showing a recent use of the weapon. It was a pointed knife, with a broad blade, and one sharp edge only—svich a Aveapon as, in the opinion of the surgeon, Avould have produced the stab in the chest. The man Avas tried and convicted, the observation of the surgeon respecting the state of the Avound and the Aveapon furnishing important evidence of his guilt. On tlie other liand, Avant of observation may lead to the discharge of guilty persons. I have elscAvhere noticed a ti'ial for murder Avhich took place in Scotland (p. 423). A Avoman Avas found dead in her bed Avith some lacerated wounds of the scalp : there Avas strong reason to believe that these had been produced by criminal violence, but it Avas suggested for the defence that as there Avere projecting nails at the head of the bed, these lacerations might have arisen from accident—a suggestion supported to some extent by the medical evidence. An experienced Avitness, hoAvever, stated that from his examination he did not belicA^e that the nails, even if they Avere in the bedstead at the time of the occurrence, coidd have produced the Avounds. He also said that as blood had issued from the Avounds, and there Avas no blood about the nails or this part of the bed around them, he did not believe that the head had at any time come in contact Avith the nails. Those who were first called to the dead body had omitted to notice Avhether there Avas anything on or near to the bed to account for the AA'ounds on the scalp, and they Avere quite unable to say Avhether there Avere or Avere not any projecting nails at the head of the bed Avhcn they first examined the body. The prisoner Avas discharged on a verdict of ' Not proven;' and there Avas some reason to believe that he escaped through manix- factured evidence, i. e. that the nails had been driven into the head of the bed subsequently to the death of the Avoman. At any rate, it seems perfectly clear from a general vieAV of the medical evidence, that the Avounds could not have been produced by the nails in the manner suggested, and that the Avounded portion of the scalp had not at any time been in contact Avith them. As they were lacerated Avounds, and so might have been produced by nails, the accused had the benefit of the doubt which Avas thus raised in the minds of the j ury. The learned judge Avho tried this case remarked that ' a medical man, ivJioi he sees a dead body, sliould notice everything: Undoubtedly he should ob- serve everything which could throw a light upon the production of wounds or other injuries found upon it. It should not be left to policemen to say Avhether there Avere any marks of blood on the dress or on tlie hands of the deceased, or on the furniture in the room. The dress of the deceased as well as the body should be always closely examined on the spot by the medical man. The importance of this precaution is Avell illu.strated by a case related at p. 404, in Avhich a man just escaped committal on Avhat


[28/1290 b21964944_0028.jp2]

MEDICAL REPORTS xxiv would have proved a false charge of murder, by reason of the examination of an article of dress accidentally produced at the adjourned inquest. There is another point which is frequently omitted on these occasions, and the omission may give rise to great inconvenience if not to a failure of justice. Thus, in reference to a dead body, no observation is made at the time of the visit whether it or any part of it is cold or warm ; whether the limbs are cold and rigid, or cold and pliant. In a medical and surgical view these conditions of \he body are of no importance whatever, but medico-legally, if the facts are observed, they may enable a witness to speak with greater or less pro- bability on the time of death : this may make all the difference between the acquittal and conviction of a person charged with murder. The case of Gardner, of which a notice will be found at p. 40, shows the importance of observations of this kind. The circumstances Avhich chiefly require notice on these occasions have been fully described in Chapter 35. In reference to supposed death from poison, other matters Avill also require special attention. These will be found in detail in Chapter 11. It may stimulate the attention of a medical practitioner in reference to these inquiries, if he is informed that the great art of counsel who defend persons charged with murder or manslaughter consists in endeavouring to discover what he omitted to do. Although sometimes the omission may be really of no medical importance whatever, yet it is usually placed before the jury in such a strong light that the accused obtains the benefit of a doubt. The omission may be attributed to professional ignorance, or, what is worse, to pro- fessional bias—a determination to find proofs of guilt against the * unhappy prisoner at the bar '—when the facts might be innocently explained by a want of experience on the part of the witness in dealing with cases of this nature. Medical Reports for Inquests,—If we except medical experts, who are selected according to their experience in different branches of the profession, medical men have no option respecting medico-legal practice, for the cases Avhich give rise to medico-legal questions are always more or less connected with the practice of medicine and surgery. The initiation of criminal pro- ceedings in England and Ireland is generally in the court of the Coroner. Unless the medical man is supposed to be implicated by maltreatment or otherwise in the death of the person, an order is issued to him to make an inspection of the body and report the resvilts. In reference to wounds, the points to which he should especially direct his attention will be found described at p. 3S2 ; in reference to poisoning, at page 153; and to alleged child- murder, at pages 885 and 890. It is proper that at the time of the inspection and analysis he should make notes of all that he observes and does; and upon this he may base a report, which should be a summary of the medical facts and of the conclusions based upon them expressed as much as possible in untechnical language. In Chapter 11, the reader will find a description of the course to be pursued on such occasions, as well as of the circumstances tinder which notes are permitted to be read; and at page 158 the rules for drawing up medico-legal reports are also fully explained.


[29/1290 b21964944_0029.jp2]

FOR COEONERS' INQUESTS. XXV There are frequently defects in these reports which it is desirable to point out. The statements are sometimes drawn up in exaggerated language : at others they are overloaded with technical and therefore unintelligible terms, and the writer is seldom sufficiently carefid to keep his facts distinct from his comments. The fonner may be useful as evidence ; the latter are inadmissible. "With respect to the first of these defects, it is very much the practice of medical men, in drawing up reports of medical cases for professional purposes, to use, unthinkingly, exaggerated language. Thus it may be observed in the drawing up of an ordinary post-mortem examination, the lining-membrane of the stomach is described as being ' intensely' inflamed; or some part is ' con- siderably' injected, or a cavity is ' enormously' distended. Expressions thus loosely employed convey to the legal mind a widely-different meaning from that intended by the reporter. They create also great difficulty in evidence if withdrawn or modified—a change which other circumstances may show to bo necessary, and at the same time they place the witness in an undesirable position before the Court. On the other hand, if retained, they may render the facts unsusceptible of explanation upon any theory of natural disease. Such descriptions obviously imply a comparison with similar conditions in numerous other dead bodies; but what is the standard by which they arc really measured, and what opportunity has the witness had of creating such a standard in his own mind ? In general, it will be found that such ex- pressions have been used without proper consideration, from a habit acquired by the writer in reporting cases for the information of medical men only. Let him who is inclined to use them bear in mind that barristers look much more closely to the strict signification of words than medical men, and that they are always disposed to distrust the judgment of one who cannot speak or write without resorting to the use of the superlative degree. The free use of technical tenns in drawing up reports may be attributed to a similar practice in tlie profession. Putting aside those cases in Avhicli a medical man thinks he is displaying his erudition by the selection and use of such terms, there can be no doubt that the greater number of medical prac- titioners fall into this practice from mere habit. They think they are address- ing the report to the president and members of a medical society, instead of a coroner and jury who have never in their reading or experience met with such terms, and to Avhom therefore they are perfectly unintelligible. In a report on the appearances in the body of a man who had suffered from chronic insanity, which was submitted to me for explanation, the following passage occurred :—' The only morbid appearance in the brain was an atheromatous deposit in the Pons Varolii, near the situation of the locus niger.' In another document, the reporter stated, for the information of a coroner's jury, that the ' integuments of the cranium were reflected, and the calvarium was exposed.' If a reporter will use such terms as these or others of a similar kind, such as * parietes of the abdomen,' ' epigastrium,' ' hypertrophy of the liver,' when it Avould require no more trouble to put what he means in plain English, he must be prepared to have his meaning perverted or wholly misunderstood. Setting aside the men who act as jurors, it may be observed that educated persons, such


[30/1290 b21964944_0030.jp2]

XXVI MEDICO-LEGAL REPOKTS. as coroners and magistrates, do not commonly include professional terms within the range of their studies. There are but few of them who understand the dif- ference between perineum and peritoneum, or the meaning of the words hemis2->heres of the brain, pia mater, puncta cruenta, corpora quadrigemina, centrmn ovale, &c. They are not likely to know the difference between the cardia and pylorus, nor the nature or situation of the duodenum, jejunum, ileum or caecum, and are as ready to consider them to be parts of the liver or urinary bladder as of the intestines. * On one occasion, I heard a learned judge ask for an explanation of the meaning of the term ' alimentary canal.' A slight consideration Avill show to any medical practitioner that refined pro- fessional language is wholly misplaced in a report which is intended to inform and convince the minds of ordinary men upon plain matters of fact. The last point which calls for comment in reference to medical reports, i.s the loose manner in which facts and comments on facts, as well as hearsay statements, are sometimes found blended. If a reporter takes care to eliminate facts from comment, his report is admissible, and may be read at the inquest or trial as evidence. The facts are for the jury,—the comments upon the facts, introduced by the reporter, may or may not be just, and are therefore not evidence. Their correctness or relevancy to the case will be elicited in the cross-examination. As a rule, nothing should be entered in a report which is not connected with the subject of inquiry, and which has not actually fallen under the observation of the reporter. The introduction of hearsay state- ments—i.e. statements made by others, or of circumstances which have come to his knowledge through public rumour—should be carefully avoided. In the case of M^Lachlan, Avho Avas tried for the murder of Jessie M'Pherson, at the GlasgoAV Autumn Circuit, 18G2 (see p. 42), some discus- sion arose upon Avhat shoidd and Avhat should not find a place in a medical report. A report was put in at the trial, in Avhich the surgeon of police, AAdio had been authorized to make a post-mortem examination of the body of de- ceased, stated, in commencing his report, that the body had been found ' nnder circumstances of great suspicion,^ in a front room, &c. The judge, Lord Deas liere remarked that this Avas matter Avhich was not suitable to a medical report. So again, in reference to the conclusions drawn, the first and third Avere as folloAvs :— 1. 'That this Avoman (the deceased) Avas muvclercd, and that Avith extreme ferocity.' 3. ' That a severe struggle had taken, place hefore death."" The suggestion of murder Avas an anticipation of the verdict of the jury As a general rule, conclusions are limited to the cause of death, and no refer- ence is made to ferocity. This passed Avithout comment, but tlie third conclusion led to the foUoAving examination:— Q. You say that in the kitchen there Avas evidence of a severe conflict having taken place. What Avas the nature of that evidence ? A. There were blood-stains upon the end of the jaw-box, at the inner side of the kitchen door. Q. But Avhat led you to say there Avere marks of a severe conflict?


[31/1290 b21964944_0031.jp2]

xxvii FACTS AND COMMENTS ON FACTS. A. TlicsG marks were principally upon the flags. Q. IIow did that show that there had been a severe conflict ? The draffcin"- of the body was not a sign of a severe conflict. I therefore want to know what marks of a severe conflict were apparent to you before the dragging commenced ? A. My conclusion that there was a severe conflict Avas founded upon the streaks which Avere upon the kitchen floor. Q. I again ask, what Avere the marks of a scA^ere conflict before the dragging (of the body) took place ? A. There Avere regular marks, as if caused by some rougli substance. The Judge (Lord Deas) to Avitness : That is streaking still, and the remark in yoiir report about' evidence of a severe conflict' just confirms Avhat I have said already as to the introduction of matter not proper to a medical report (Eeport of trial, p. 37). The difficidty here arose from the introduction of comments into the report. There Avas no evidence of conflict or struggle, as far as this examination goes. The facts upon Avhich the Avitncss relied as evidence of a struggle Avere equally consistent Avith the dragging of the body after death. In a medical report of an analysis in a case of suspected poisoning, it is not necessary that all the details of an analysis should be entered. A general statement of the results, to the effect that certain tests and processes had been used, Avill be sufficient. In the various analyses connected with the case of J. P. Cook and Ann Palmer {Iteg. y. Palmer, C.C.C., May 185G), an applica- tion Avas made to Dr. Pees and myself to give to the prisoner's attorney, before the trial, a statement of the Avhole of the details of our analysis for antimony and strychnia. We declined to do this Avithout authority. The Queen's Trench Avas appealed to, and Lord Campbell decided that there Avas no legal gi-ovmd on which such a demand could be enforced. Considering that the medical evidence against the prisoner Avas so clear and conclusive, the counsel for the CroAvn advised that Ave should concede the point, although admitted to be neither in accordance Avith laAV nor custom. Upon this advice avc acted, but it is not a course Avhich I should recommend any scientific Avitness to follow in a future case. The result Avas that, before the trial, these private memoranda Avere placed in the hands of some professed chemists retained for the defence, Avhose object Avas simply hostile criticism. Portions of them appeared in a garbled and fragmentary, and therefore in an incorrect, form, in some journals and ncAVspapers, Avith comments attacking the i^rocesscs and conclusions before our evidence had been given. It Avas Avell knoAvn to those Avho had been guilty of this unprofessional conduct, that under the circumstances, Ave, as Avitnesses for the CroAvn, Avere precluded from making any reply or ffiving any explanation. The object, hoAvever, in this me- mo rable case, Avas not truth, but victory. No medical man is called upon to lay himself open to attacks of this nature, or to furnish materials for a cross- examination to ' medical counsel' acting only in the interests of a prisoner. In re"-ard to the chemical research for poisons, chemists generally differ about the process which it may be desirable to pursue in a given case; and although


[32/1290 b21964944_0032.jp2]

XXviii MEDICAL EVIDENCE AT CORONERS' INQUESTS. the same result may be reached by various methods, it is by no means difficult to find one who Avill assert that his is the only correct process, and that all otliersare fallacious, or to raise by such counter-statements that kind of doubt in the minds of a jury Avhich may lead to the discrediting of the witness's results. Upon a medical report, and such evidence as may be required to explain it, an accused person may be committed for trial at the Assizes, either by a coroner or magistrate. In the first stage of proceedings under these circum- stances, the medical witness goes before the Grand jury, and there, after the administration of an oath, he is required to make a general statement ol' what lie knows of the matter. Such questions are put as may be necessary to elucidate the cause of death; and on the finding of a true bill for murder or manslaughter, the accused is placed upon his trial before one of the learned judges of assize. According to the variable circumstances attending such cases, the medical evidence is called for at an early or late stage of the pro- ceedings. When it is at all doubtful whether the cause of death was owing to any criminal act, it is called for at the commencement of the case in order to lay a foundation for further inquiry. It is necessary that a medical Avitness should remember that copies of his report and depositions, either before a coroner or magistrate, are usually placed in the hands of counsel as well as of the learned judge, and that his evidence, as it is given at the trial, is compared word for word with that Avhich has been already put on record. There is reason to believe that this is not generally known to members of the medical profession, and thus it happens that either fi.*om failure of memory, want of accurate observation, or carelessness in giving evidence at coroners' inquests, medical witnesses lay themselves open to severe censure, either by stating matters differently at the trial, or by giving a very different complexion to the facts. Any serious deviations from Avhat is on record will of course tell unfavourably for the witness, supply materials for a severe cross-examination, and form an excellent ground of defence for the prisoner. The witness's weakness is the prisoner's opportunity, and of course his counsel Avill not lose the occasion of impressing upon the jury that a man who can on oath give two different accounts of the same transaction is not to be believed on either. Coroners' Inquests.—The proceedings at Coroners' inquests are treated too lightly by medical men. The ignorant and uneducated class of persons who often constitute the jury, as well as the circumstances under which the inquiry usually takes place, are not calculated to inspire great respect for these initia- tory proceedings; but still by laAV and custom coroners' inquisitions are and have been for ages in this country the only tribunals for inquiring into and determining the cause of death in cases of suspected violence ; and they are therefore deserving of more attention than is usually shoAA^n to them by medical witnesses. The obserA-ations made at p. 885 in reference to inquests in alleged child-murder apply to all other cases demanding medical evidence. As a rule, in all inquests Avhich are likely to end in a committal of the accused person, a medical man Avho is giving his evidence before a coroner, in the


[33/1290 b21964944_0033.jp2]

coroners' inquests. xxix room of a small country inn, or in a village scliool-room, is virtually delivering it before a judge of assize; and this fact alone, if not a respect for the Court, shoiild induce him to give the evidence guardedly, and with a due considera- tion to the serious results to which it may ultimately lead. Coroners' inquisitions are so intimately associated with the practice of medical jurisprudence in reference to criminal cases, that it is impossible to pass over this subject without pointing out what must be regarded as the defects of this method of inquiry. The 4th Edward I., stat. 2, on which coroners profess to act, directs that, * upon information,' they shall ' go to the place where any be slain or sud- denly dead,' and make due inquiry as to the cause, &c., before a jury selected from persons living in the neighbourhood. The information upon which a coroner generally acts is,—1. Notice from a beadle, or other officer of the parish (whose zeal is sometimes stimiilated by a fee or salary) of any death from sudden or supposed unusual causes. 2. Notice from a medical man who may have attended the deceased, and who communicates his suspicion that the cause of death is not natural. 3. Notice from a registrar of deaths that no cause has been assigned in a particular case, or that there has been a rapid death after a short illness. The conclusion to which experience leads in reference to these inquiries is, that the system affords no certainty for the detection of crime; that it alfords no protection to those who are wrongly charged with crime; and lastly, that in some cases it screens a criminal by a verdict based upon an imperfect inquiry, in which the important medical facts are either not xmderstood or are misinterpreted by the jmy. Admitting that some crimes (which might have remained concealed) have been brought to light by this system, it is my opinion that, as the inquiry is now conducted, it fails to exercise any deterring influence on criminals. In a large proportion of cases, no inspection of the dead body is made. This is probably in order to avoid the expense of a post-mortem examination. It would be easy to point to cases in which death by poison has been thus concealed, and the flict has only come to light by accident some years after- wards. "With rare exceptions, indeed, is it justifiable on the part of a coroner to hold an inquiry on a dead body without a strict external and inter- nal examination of the body. Either the inquiry is necessary, or it is not. If not necessary, the coroner is to blame in holding it; if necessary, an in- spection of the body is the very essence of the inquiry, where it refers to one who ' has been slain or is suddenly dead.' I was once an attendant at a funeral; it was delayed, and the cause of the delay was simply this :—An inquest had been held on the body (a case of very sudden death in a state of health), and a verdict of ' Death from disease of the heart' had been returned. There had been no inspection of the body. When the grave-clothes were removed, and the body was examined, it was found to be covered with bruises, and some of the muscles of the thigh were re- duced to a jelly. Death had been clearly caused by violence. But an inquiry before a coroner for two days had, with all the usual foraialities of medical


[34/1290 b21964944_0034.jp2]

COEONERS' IXQUESTS. IXQUIRIES XXX evidence, &c., resulted in a verdict of' Death from disease of the heart.' Within two hours only of the body being put into the ground, it was clearly proved to be an act of murder or manslaughter. The guilty party was tried, con- victed, and punished. {Reg. V. Ilopley, p. 471.) This case, with several others of a similar kind, establishes two propositions. The coroner's inquest affords no certainty for the detection of crime. It, in some cases, tends to screen a criminal. The secrets of -the grave are only known to those who practise medical jurisprudence. In the course of the last thirty years, at least fifteen cases of the exhumation of dead bodies have been referred to me. On some of these, inquests had been held, but no inspections Avere made. Verdicts of death from cholera or natural causes had been returned, and, at intervals of from one month to twenty-two months, the bodies have been disinterred, and it has been then proved that the deceased had died from poison. In some of these cases the deaths were sudden, and in others slow; in the latter the symptoms during life were mistaken for those of disease, medical certificates of the cause of death were given without sufficient inquiry, and thus it is that crime passes undetected, and several lives may be desti-oyed in succession before a cii- minal is arrested. There is a popular notion in accordance with the ancient statute, that sudden deaths only require an investigation by the coroner; but this is an error. A large proportion of sudden deaths take place from well- known natural causes, easily elicited by a proper medical inquiry, and they strictly demand no judicial proceedings. On the other hand, in all cases of chronic poisoning, the form which secret murder has of late years assimied, the person has lingered on with intermitting symptoms, and death has taken place only after an illness of some weeks' duration. There is no provision for the detection of such cases. Their discovery appears to be a matter of accident. As a rule, it may be said that all inquests in which there has been no medical inspection of the body are a vain mockery, and the sooner the public mind is imbued with this proposition the better for society. It is not implied that the bodies of all persons who die suddenly should be inspected. If cir- cumstances of a suspicious kind justify an inquest, ipso facto there should bo an inspection. If an inspection is not required, an inquest is not required. Such cases as inquiries into deaths from machinery, railway accidents, &c., Avhere the physical injury is obviously sufficient to account for death without further inspection, are excepted from this remark. The verdicts of coroners' juries are sometimes quite erroneous and contrary to the medical evidence. Great injury is thus done occasionally to innocent persons. At the Assizes the bill may be thrown out by the Grand jury; but the person inculpated by the verdict may always have a stigma attached to his character, as a result of mistake or misapprehension of medical evidence or, sometimes, of local prejudice. ' Many persons who occupy the office of coroner are neither medically nor judicially qualified for the proper performance of the duties of the oflice. The system of electing a man to hold such an office as this (one demanding special medical knowledge of the causes of death, and good legal knowlcd4 of the


[35/1290 b21964944_0035.jp2]

BEFORE THE CORONER AND PROCURATOR FISCAL. law of evidence) by freeholders of the lowest degree, is so intrinsically absurd, that it is quite wonderful how, with improved knowledge and the advance of civilisation, it has maintained its ground in such a country as England, The election of a Lord Chancellor, of the judges of our Courts of Law, or of County Court judges, might be with equal reason left in the hands of voters of this class,—men who have no knowledge of the duties of the office, or of the skill and learning required in one who is really competent to fill it. The election of a good and capable person as coroner is, therelbre; a matter of pure accident. No preliminary test of ability or capacity is required. In Scotland, the office of coroner does not exist; but in place of this there is an officer named Procurator Fiscal, generally a skilled solicitor, nominated by competent authority, and not elected by scot and lot voters. The general order issued to these officers by the Lord Advocate enjoins that in cases where a dead body is discovered, the Procurator Fiscal shall obtain a medical report of the cause of death ; and in cases of persons found dead, the body is generally inspected for this purpose. This, however, is at the option of the appointed officer, the instruction Ueing in these words:—' Wherever in his opinion a written medical report is necessary for the due consideration of the case, he, the Procurator, shall obtain such a report from a duly-qualified medical practitioner.' The usual practice in England is to select the nearest medical practitioner, whether he has had any experience or not, and often to trust an important chemical inquiry in the hands of one who probably has never before made an inspection or an analysis for poison. The steps necessary for the proper identity and presentation of viscera, or other articles for analysis, are neglected. The stomach is cut open, and the contents may be entirely lost. The stomach containing poison is thrown into the same vessel with other viscera, and thus all are impregnated with poison. Evidence of absorption and diffusion of poison through the body during life is thereby entirely destroyed. Stomachs have been sent for analysis wrapped only in brown paper. On one occasion, two stomachs (of children poisoned) were sent in bladders, milabelled. The identity of these at the subsequent trial for murder could only be made out by the different coloiu- of the string with Avhich one bladder was tied. On another occasion, in a newly-papered room in Avhich a body was examined, the stomach was Avrapped in a portion of the paper-hangings lying about: these, as it happened, were coloured Avith an arsenical pigment, and the poison was thus transferred from the paper to the stomach. The selection of the nearest medical man, or of any gentleman who will make an inspection and an analysis for the parliamentary fee of two guineas, in a case of murder by poison, generally leads to a large expenditure subsequently for a further analysis before the trial, when the parts in which the poison would be most probably found, have been destroyed. On such occasions it is the custom to condemn severely the medical and chemical gentlemen, who have probably, lor the first time in their lives, undertaken a case of this serious nature upon the express order of a coroner, with insufficient renumeration for its perform- ance. This is manifest injustice. The fliult is in the system, and not in the


[36/1290 b21964944_0036.jp2]

xxxii DEFECTS OP coroners' INQUESTS. men, who do their utmost to perform a difficult duty, for the first time, as well as they can. If a coroner places the inspection of a body in the hands of one who is not well skilled in the appearances produced by poison or disease, it is obvious that a serious mistake may be committed which may implicate an innocent person. If he places a stomach for analysis in the hand of an inexperienced analyst, it is not the fault of the analyst (whose living depends on his prac- tice) if he imdertakes it, and falls into some grievous act of omission or com- mission. The error is rather with the system ; and the sooner it is abolished, and a more reasonable mode of proceeding substituted, the better. There is for these defects a simple remedy, which is often now resorted to by the coroner in cases demanding great medical and scientific skill—in other words, the evidence of experts. After a coroner's inquiry, the whole of the proceedings are sometimes directed to be re-heard before a magistrate or magistrates, who can analyse and sift evidence, and can bring the minds of educated men and trained lawyers to bear upon the facts. A proper analysis and inspection are then made, and the case in this complete form goes before an Assize court for trial. If this is done occasionally in cases of importance, why not in all cases that are now properly the subjects of a coroner's inquiry? Let a well-trained gentleman be appointed as a stipendiary judge in every county or borough ; let him, upon the same sources of information as are now open to the Coroner, hold inquiries or not, according to his judgment. There are many coroners who are quite competent to fill such an office. In each county, borough, or district, there should be appointed, as in some States on the Continent a skilled surgeon—skilled in the inspection of the dead body, and in a knowledge of the causes of death ; and a skilled chemist, skilled in the processes for the detection of poisons. To these three officers, and, if necessary, to assistants appointed by and under them, all inquiries into crimes connected with the death of persons should be exclusively remitted. Proper salaries for skilled surgeons and analysts would secure competent men, and probably turn out in the end to be less costly than the present system. The duties of sanitary officers (which are not heavy) might be shared by the medical and chemical gentlemen appointed to these offices. Some such regulations as these must sooner or later be made if the public desire to have the duties of an important office properly fulfilled. The value of life is greater in England than in any other country; but this remark ap- plies only to cases of crime which are actually detected, and to the prosecution and pmiishment of criminals. I believe that we are greatly inferior to other nations in our means f^r the scientific detection of crime and murder by secret poisoning. In the case of William Palmer (185G), there was evidence to shoAv that his wife, his wife's mother,'two of his children, his brother and one of his personal friends, had all died from poison under his roof, within two or three years before the death of Cook—for the murder of whom Palmer was tried and convicted. His wife had been poisoned by tartar emetic, and his brother by prussic acid. The deaths of at least two others in his house were probably violent. Where was the Coroner's inquest for the protection of life ? '


[37/1290 b21964944_0037.jp2]

xxxiii THE INSPECTION OF THE BODY. Insjyections.—The necessity for appointing a skilled independent inspector of bodies in all snspected cases demanding inquiry, will be apparent Irom other considerations. Under the present system, a person who has destroyed the life of another by poison may be present at the post-mortem inspection of the body of his victim, and may iise his efforts to defeat the objects of the inquiry. Wil- liam Palmer, a medical man, was thus allowed to be present at the inspection of the body of Cook. He nominated the persons, one of them an inexperienced young man who had never before inspected a body in a case of death from poison, and he stood over them while they were engaged in the office. The stomach of the deceased when received for analysis was cut open throughout its length. The injury to this organ, by which at least a portion of the contents was lost, occurred during the inspection, and is said to have arisen from Palmer having accidentally (as it was alleged) pushed against the youth who was making the inspection ! After the viscera had been placed in a jar and secured with a bladder, Palmer found an opportimity of cutting the bladder with a knife and inverting the jar, and this probably led to a further loss of the contents. In a case of exhumation in Avhich I was consulted, the viscera had been carefully removed and placed (as it was supposed) in separate jars, which were properly secured and labelled. When the jar labelled ' Stomach and Con- tents ' was opened by the analyst to whom it had been sent, it was found empty. From inquiries subsequently made, there was but little doubt that a person who was interested in preventing an analysis was permitted to be present at the in- spection, and that he had taken the opportunity, when the inspectors were other- wise occupied, of removing the stomach from the jar and again secretly return- ing it into the abdomen before the body was sewn up or otherwise disposing of it. Acts of this kind should be impossible in the present day, and the best secu- rity against their occurrence would be the appointment of a skilled inspector in a district, to conduct all post-mortem examinations for coroners' inquests. A charge of malapraxis is sometimes raised against a medical man in conse- quence of the death of a patient. The examination of the body may, by order of a coroner, be unknowingly placed in the hands either of a professional rival, or of a friend of the person inculpated. This is not just either to the practitioner or the imblic. There is nothing more easy, medically speaking, than to ex- aggerate appearances in a body, or to assign to the action of medicines, or to the use of surgical instruments, post-mortem conditions of the body to which an independent and experienced anatomical inspector would probably attach no importance. Supposing the question to be that a patient has died from an overdose of opium, said to have been found in the stomach—if the analysis has been intrusted by a coroner to any professional rival, or to an incompetent analyst selected by him, the injury done may be irreparable. These are not imaginary cases: they have occjLirred and must occur until special inspectors and analysts are appointed in place of men who are now taken by chance, by the fact of their living in the vicinity, or of their being called to see the person while dying. If a person has had poison administered to him feloniously and he recovers, the facts of the case are duly investigated by a magistrate, the evidence is b


[38/1290 b21964944_0038.jp2]

XXXiv ENFORCED ATTENDANCE AT INQUESTS. carefully sifted, analyses are properly made when required, and the depositions- are so drawn up as to form a correct basis of proceedings for the trial of the accused. If, however, the person dies from the poison, the case then goes before a coroner and a coroner's jury; and although the medical and other: questions which arise are usually of greater importance, they are now- dealt with by men frequently incompetent to undei'stand them, and who ai-e not always qualified to elicit the facts or put them into a proper shape for trial. Hence it is that, unless a true bill has been found by a Grand jury at the Assizes or the alleged criminal has been committed by a magistrate, no prose- • cution is commonly instituted. The proceedings taken before a coroner are im this case disregarded by counsel and judges. There is no doubt that a large number of these officers might be retained I with benefit to the public, but the system of nomination by election should be ■ altered. Tried and competent men only should be appointed, and in place of a jury they should have the assistance of persons skilled in a knowledge of the causes of death and in conducting post-mortem examinations and analyses. Under the present system coroners are empowered by the Medical Witnesses' Act (G and 7 William IV. c. 89) to issue an order for the attendance of any legally-qualified practitioner; a fee of two guineas is the maximum allowed for making a post-mortem examination, and, if considered necessary by the jury, a chemical analysis of the stomach and intestines. A penalty of five poiuids is attached to disobedience of this order, except for reasonable cause. Mr. llumsey has correctly represented the unsatisfactory position in which medical men are placed by such an arrangement. He observes: ' It is no discredit to a practitioner engaged in the toilsome routine of ordinary medical duties, if he should feel himself at a loss when called upon for a decisive opinion in some obscure case of poisoning or infanticide. His scanty opportunities for the study of these subjects and for making post-mortem examinations cannot suffice to qualify him for answering the delicate and important questions which he must answer before a jury can find a proper verdict.' . . . ' The custom of indiscriminately summoning medical practitioners of all sorts, and of all degrees of pathological knowledge and forensic skill, has sadly depre- ciated the value of medical evidence in courts of justice. Public confidence in the profession has been shaken, and the appearance of a " doctor " in the witness-box is but too often a signal for spurt among gentlemen of the long robe.' (' Essays on State Medicine,' p. 356). No man can be compelled to undertake that which he feels incompetent to perform, and some medical practitioners who have felt this want of experience have properly declined to make chemical analyses involving so serious a responsibility. It is thus that, in many cases of importance, analyses for coroners' inquests are now referred to chemical experts, and the practitioner discharges himself of that responsibility which the Medical Witnesses' Act imposes upon him without any adequate remvuieration. Before quitting this subject, it is necessary to observe that medical men are too ready to give their opinions of the cause of death for a coroner's inquest without making an inspection of the body. No man is compellable to o-ive


[39/1290 b21964944_0039.jp2]

XXXV OBEDIENCE TO A SUBPOENA. an opinion upon insufficient data, and if by the institution of a judicial inquiiy there are grounds for believing that a death has not been natural, no medical opinion of the cause should be given in the absence of an inspection. Such an opinion must always be conjectural, and involve the medical man in an unpleasant responsibility. (See p. 69G.) Trial at the Assizes.—The next stage of the proceedings in a criminal case brings a medical Avitness before a superior Court. For this purpose a subpoena is issued. It need hardly be observed that every witness is bound to obey a subpoena, Avhen with it his reasonable expenses for joiu-ney, &c. are tendered to him, but he is not bound to attend at the trial except vipon a subpoena. There are some questions connected with this subject which it will be proper to consider in this place. If a subpa2na is served on an ordinary or skilled medical witness, is he bound to obey it ? In Belts v. Clifford (Warwick Lent Assizes, 1858) the late Lord Campbell stated, in answer to a question, that a scientific tvitness Avas not bound to attend ixpon being served with a subpoena, and that he ought not to be subpoenaed. If the Avitness kncAV any question of fact he might be compelled to attend, but he could not be compelled to give his attendance to speak to matters of opinion. In Rich v. Pierpoint, an action for malapraxis, Dr. Lee Avas summoned against his will to give evidence on the part of the plaintiff. He stated that on the evening before the trial a solicitor called on him and left a subpoena • Avith him. Dr. Lee Avould not hear any account of the case Avhich the solicitor proposed to give, and expresseil his resolution to have nothing to do with the trial. The solicitor informed him that he would be required to pay the usual penalty if he did not attend. He went down to Kingston, and was warned not to leave the Court until the trial Avas over. He heard the evidence on the part of the plaintiff, and upon this and the medical evidence he gave his opinion—not much in favour of the party A\'ho summoned him, and not much against him. Dr. Lee considered that he could not avoid attending the trial under these circumstances. (' Medical Times and Gazette,' April 12, 1862, p. 389.) In the case of Webb v. Page (' Carrington and KirAvan's Reports,' p. 23) the late Mr. Justice Maule ruled as follows :—' There is a distinction,' said his Lordship, ' betAveen the case of a man who sees a fact and is called to prove it in a Court of justice, and that of a man Avho is selected by a party to give his opinion on a matter on which he is peculiarly conversant from the nature of his employment in life. The former is bound, as a matter of piiblic duty, to speak to a fact Avhich happens to have fallen within his OAvn knoAvledge— Avithout such testimony the coui-se of justice must be stopped. The latter is under no such obligation; there is no such necessity for his evidence, and the party Avho selects him must pay him,' In the case referred to by Mr. Justice Maule, a skilled Avitness had been subpoenaed, but refused to give evidence unless first paid for his services and loss of time (' Medical Times and Gazette,' April 26, 1862, p. 432). A barrister, who quotes this ruling, goes on to say : ' There is one reason why I should not advise any person in the position of a skilled witness totally to disregard a subpoena. It is quite clear b 2


[40/1290 b21964944_0040.jp2]

xxxvi MEDICAL FACTS AND OPINIONS. that should such a person fail to attend a trial no attachment could issue, even if he Avere called as is usual upon the subpoena, because the party sub-- poenaing him could not make the requisite affidavits that he was damnified' by the witness's absence and in what respect. But such party might bring: an action for damages; and although he Avould recover none, he might noti only worry, but might even put the defendant to a considerable expense, as- taxed costs by no means include the entire costs in such cases. Although,, tlierefore, I could not advise a total neglect of the subpoena, the safest course ■ Avould be to obey it, and demand expenses before giving evidence. Such expenses would be only those allowed for a professional witness (not special fees); but if the person so subpoenaed Avere Avilling to run the risk of an action, he might safely absent himself Avithout any fear of an attachment from the Court for contempt.' With regard to the question Avh ether a skilled witness wotdd be permitted to demand a high fee for his attendance under such circumstances, the writer adds: ' To permit him legally to demand a high fee Avould perhaps look some- what like legally countenancing a bribe.' At all CA^ents there is no such legal recognition. The question may not be one of fees, but of obedience to a simple order to attend and give evidence on matters of opinion irrespective of scientific facts. In a case before Vice-Chancellor Wood {Simpson v. HaLliday^ 1864), I was re- quired to attend on a subpoena as a skilled Avitness, to give evidence of opinion in reference to the alleged infringement of a patent. The defendant, Avho sum- moned me, did not make it in any Avay a question of fees ; but being wholly unacquainted Avith the facts of the case, I did not feel in a position at a short notice to appear as a Avitness for parties of whom I kncAV nothing. I obeyed the subpoena, as the disobedience of it might haA^e been, in the present uncertain state of the laAv, a contempt of Court; and after giving my evidence, I requested his Honour to state for future guidance Avhether a skilled Avitness was compelled to attend under such circumstances as those in Avhich I had attended. I referred him at the same time to the decision of Lord Campbell in Belts v. Clifford. The Vice-Chancellor said that a Court of LaAV never gave an opinion on a speculative question, and there the matter ended. It AvoiTld seem therefore that a skilled Avitness, Avho is not acquainted Avith any of the facts in a case, may be compelled by a subpoena to attend and give evidence on a matter involving scientific opinion alone. Some months before this occurrence, I had given CAddence in a similar case, and the defendant Ilalliday, seeing that my opinion in that case was favourable to his vieAvs, exercised a right to impound my services on his behalf When some portions of the public press undertake to censure experts for acting as hired Avitnesses, it may be as Avell to remember that they may be sometimes unAvillingly forced into Court by subpoenas Avhich they dare not disobey. Lord Campbell's dictum in reference to the distinction betAveen fact and opinion confers no practical benefit on witnesses. It is at all times difficult in science, and in the medical sciences particularly, to separate them ; and if a man appears to testify to a medical or scientific fact, he cannot avoid givin"- an opinion arising out of the fact. In a recent action against a drufv»i-ist for a


[41/1290 b21964944_0041.jp2]

xxxvii SUBPCENAS. MEDICAL WITNESSES. mistake in compounding medicine, an attempt was made to procure my opinion as a skilled witness at the trial, by reason of facts obtjiined from the report of a chemical analysis, the object of which was at the time entirely concealed from me. The suit was fortunately compromised, and my attend- ance was not necessary; but such a case should convey a caution to chemical exjierts. They may be employed secretly and under untrue statements to make analyses; these become facts on which they may be summoned like ordinary witnesses to give ojnnions as skilled witnesses, while the payment of the usual fee for a skilled witness is evaded. A medical man may be placed in the disagreeable position of receiving separate subpoenas, to attend trials at different Assizes which are held at or about the same time. An obedience to both of them is clearly impossible—one at least must be sacrificed to the other. I have been placed in this position on three occasions, and on one of these I was called from a civil trial which had commenced in the Assize Coiurt at Durham, to a criminal trial which was fixed to take place on the same day at Lincoln. The civil case was postponed, and I had so far the benefit of the opinion of one of the most learned jtidges on the Bench, that in all cases in which there were served separate subpoenas fixing trials for the same time, the civil should give way to the criminal case. The former can be postponed, the latter cannot. But if the subpoenas are for two criminal cases, the coxirse of a witness should be to attend to that in which the subpoena was first served upon him. Medical Witnesses.—Assuming that the medical man has obeyed the sub- poena, he will now be required to attend before the Court, and to state, in the face of adverse counsel, the opinions which he has formed fi-om the medical facts of the case, as well as the grounds for these opinions. He will then for the first time undergo the ordeal of a public examination. Some medico-legal writers have considered it necessary to lay down rules respecting the manner in which a medical witness should give his evidence ; how he is to act on a cross-examination, and in what way he is to recover himself on re-examination. Any advice upon this head appears to me to be quite superfluous; since experience shows that these rules, like those given to prevent drowning, are invariably forgotten at the very moment when the individual is in the situation in which it is supposed he most requires them. A man who goes to testify to the truth to the best of his ability should bear in mind two points. 1. That he should be well prepared on all parts of the subject on which he is about to give evidence. Let him remember on these occasions the advice contained in the Latin motto, ne tentes aut perfice. 2. That his demeanoiu* should be that of an educated man, and suited to the serious occasion on which he appears, even although he may feel himself provoked or irritated by the course of examination adopted. A medical witness must not show a testy di.'^position in having his professional qualifications, his experience, his means of knowledge, or the grounds for his opinions very closely investigated : he should rather prepare himself to meet with good humour the attempts of an adverse counsel to involve him in contradiction, and show by his answers that he has only a desire to state the


[42/1290 b21964944_0042.jp2]

LICENSE OF COUNSEL. xxxviii trutli. Law and custom have long established that a barrister, in defending ai prisoner charged with murder, has a right to make use of all fair and even what may appear to the witness unfair means for the defence. Nothing can tend more to loAver a witness in the opinion of the Court and jury, or diminish the value of his evidence, than the manifestation of a dis- position to deal with his examiner as if he were a personal enemy, to evade the questions put, or to answer them with flippancy or anger. All such exhibitions invariably end in the discomfiture of the Avitness. It has been suggested that medical men on these occasions might take a lesson from laAvyers, and observe hoAV little they alloAV forensic differences, Avhich they put on Avith their pro-- fessional costume, to influence them in their intercourse Avith each other, or ; with an adverse judge or jury. Medical men have complained, and on many occasions justly, of the? license of counsel. On this subject it may be Avell to consider what has beeni said by one of the highest authorities on the Bench, Chief Justice Erie ;—' The .' law trusts the advocate Avith a privilege in respect to the liberty of speech i which is in practice bomided only by his OAvn sense of duty ; and he may • have to speak uj)on subjects concerning the deepest interests of social life, audi the innermost feelings of the soul. The laAv also trusts him with a power off insisting upon answers to the most painful questioning, and this power again i is in practice only controlled by his own view of the interests of truth.'' (Judgment in A'eH?iefZ?/ v. Broun, 1862.) Thus it will be seen that almost J unlimited powers of interrogation are entrusted to coimsel by the laAV, and it is-< a serious question AA'hether the unrestricted use (Avhich it has been justly re-- marked means only the frequent abuse) of these enormous powers is neces- - sary or even favoui-able to the admininstration of justice. One of the most severe rei^rimands on this abuse came from tlie same' learned jtxdge in a case Avhich Avas before him in 1857 : it Avas addressed to' a learned serjeant now deceased, and Avas to this effect,—A question hadl been put throwing on the Avitness an imputation for which there Avas really no foundation. The learned judge then said: 'The freedom of questioni alloAved to the bar Avas a public nuLsance, and the barrister Avho made such an i imputation ought to be prosecuted. If a question had relation to the truth,. he Avas most anxious it should be put; but to cast haphazard imputations att the suggestion of a person (an attorney) who might have no scruples as to what he did, Avas a degree of mischief that made him Avish that a party should be prosecuted. He begged leave to say that in his experience he had! seen counsel so abuse their privilege, that he had cordially Avished a poAver could be instituted that they might be prosecuted for a misdemeanour.' It is the general practice to say that the obnoxious questions are in the instructions but a barrister can ahvays exercise a poAver of putting or not puttina» question Avhich may be found there. By putting it he clearly adopts it, and' frequently to the great damage of his own case. This is at present the'only check upon the practice, for learned judges seldom interfere unless appealed 1 to by the Avitness. Some medical men have claimed a privilege not to answer certain questions which are put to them, on the ground that the matters have come to their


[43/1290 b21964944_0043.jp2]

EXAMINATION IN CHIEF. XXxix knowledge through private and confidential communications with their patients. It is right to state at once that the law concedes no special privilege of this nature to members of the medical profession. No man is bomid to reply to any question if the answer would tend in any way to incriminate himself— for no man is compellable to be a witness against himself. With this excep- tion all questions must be answered, provided they are relevant to the case, and their irrelevancy is a matter for the consideration of the learned judge who presides. A witness must remember therefore that there are no medical secrets. In the case of the Duchess of Kingston this privilege of Avithholding statements was claimed by a medical witness but denied. In a case in which a female was indicted for the murder of her infant, a siirgeon Avas called to prove certain confessions made to him by the Avoman during his attendance. He objected, on the ground that he Avas then attending her as a private patient. The learned judge (Park, J.) said this Avas not a sufficient reason to prevent a disclosure for the purposes of justice, and he Avas ordered to ansAver the questions. (Beck's ' Med. Jurisprudence,'vol. ii. p. 922). Any statements therefore Avhich are made to physicians or surgeons while attending persons in a private capacity, although they are not to be volunteered in evidence, must be given in ansAver to questions Avhatever consequences may ensue. Cases of poisoning and Avounding, duelling, as Avell as cases which involve questions of diA'orce or the legitimacy of offspring, may be materially affected by the answers of the medical man on matters which have been the subject of private communications. Examination-in-chief.—The ordinary course of proceeding in a criminal case is thus concisely stated by Mr. Fitzjamos Stephen (' Criminal LaAv of England,' pp. 168, 282). After opening the case the counsel for the Crown calls the Avitnesses, and examines them according to the rules of evidence—that is, he brings out by questions which do not suggest their answers, the facts relevant to the issue to be tried which are within his personal knoAvledge. Those questions AA^hich suggest the ansAvers are called ' leading ' questions. With one exception it is not the practice to allow these to be put in this part of the examination. The exception according to Mr. Stephen is: ' Wlien the judge is satisfied, either by a Avitness's demeanour or by contradictions betAveen the evidence and the depositions, that he is trying to keep back the truth and favour the prisoner, he may in his discretion allow the counsel for the CroAvn to ask leading questions and, as the phrase is, to treat the Avit- ness as hostile.' When the examination-in-chief has been given, the next step is the cross-examination. Cross-examination.—In this, the second stage, the counsel for the prisoner extracts from the medical Avitness, by questions lohich may suggest the answer in the strongest form, any facts that may appear to be favourable to his client, and Avhich he believes to be within the Avitness's knoAvledge. Leading ques- tions are not only alioAvable in this part of the examination, but, according to good authority, a counsel for the defence can hardly lead too much. The theory of the law is that the witness is unfavourable to the prisoner and has come to


[44/1290 b21964944_0044.jp2]

xl CROSS-EXAMINATION AND RE-EXAMINATION. bear evidence against him. The more he has shoAvn himself by conduct or conversation a partisan in the case, the more severely Avill he be treated. Any- thing which he may have said in the hearing of others, or published in journals or even written in private letters (if the contents transpire) in reference to the case or the guilt of the prisoner, is noAV brought to light, although he may have supposed that what he did say was in perfect confidence. It is at this stage of the case that any exaggerations which may have been most favourably re- ceived by the counsel for the prosecution are reduced to their true proportions. Any bias by which the mind of a witness may have been influenced, or any imperfection or confusion of memory as to facts, is here brought out. (Stephen, p. 177.) It is in this part of his examination that the witness will be closely questioned as to his qualifications, the time during which he has been engaged in practice, the accuracy of his judgment, his general professional knowledge, and his special experience in reference to the matter in issue, the number of cases he has seen, &c. StraightforAvard answers should be given to all these questions. No harm can be done to the witness by the answers imless they are given evasively, since it is not to be supposed that the witness wishes to represent himself differently fi-om what he is. If he does make the attempt, he will assuredly fail. The most striking distinction between the examination- in-chief and cross-examination is in reference to leading questions. It rests upon the assumption that there is a danger that a witness will say Av^hatever is suggested to him by the one side, and conceal everything that is not extorted from him on the other. It need scarcely be observed that witnesses whose evidence is of little im- portance in the case are rarely cross-examined. This, however, is reserved in its most stringent form for those whose facts and opinions are likely to afifect the fate of a prisoner in a criminal trial. In dealing with a skilled witness whose evidence may be of importance, the questions in cross-examination are usually put by the counsel for the prisoner with great caution, or the answers brought out may be more adverse to his own case than those elicited in the examination-in-chief. Rc-examination.—The cross-examination is usually followed by a re-exa- mination on the part of the counsel lor the Crown, or of the counsel by whom the witness has been called. The object of this is to clear up or ex- plain any portion of the evidence which may have been rendered obscure or doubtful by the cross-examination. It is sometimes unnecessary to put a question, and if the witness has given his evidence consistently and fairly no questions may be asked. As a rule the re-examination must be confined to those matters which have arisen out of the cross-examination. Any questions upon new subjects may render a further cross-examination on them necessary. In reference to facts, a medical witness must bear in mind that he should not allow his testimony to be influenced by the consequences which may follow from his statement of them, or their probable effect on any case which is under trial. In reference to opinions, their possible influence on the fate of a prisoner should inspire caution in forming them; but when once formed they should be honestly and candidly stated without reference to consequences. It


[45/1290 b21964944_0045.jp2]

xli PRESENCE OF MEDICAL WITNESSES IN COURT. will be well to remember, in regard to each stage of the examination, what a great medical authority has said :—' To make a show and appear learned and ingenious in natural knowledge may flatter vanity. To know tacts, to separate them from supposition, to arrange and connect them, to make them plain to ordinary capacities, and above all to point out their useful applications, should be the chief object of ambition.' (William Hunter.) Quotations from books.—It is a not unfrequent custom with counsel to refer to medical works during the examination of a witness. He is ex- pected to have a fair knowledge of the writings of professional men in re- ference to the subject of inquiry. The authority is mentioned, the passage is quoted, and the witness may be then asked whether he agrees with the views of the author or whether he differs, and if so, his reasons. In cases connected with medical treatment, the views of the profession are and have been so various, that a barrister would have no great difficulty in finding some book to oppose to the opinions of a witness. Stjvndard works of recent date are so well known to the profession that there are few medical men engaged in practice who are not acquainted Avith and able to explain the views of the writers and how far they agree or conflict with his own. The witness must be on his guard that the quotation is fairly made, and that it is properly taken with the context, or he may unexpectedly find himself involved in a difficulty. On one occasion I found that a learned gentleman stopped in his quotation at a comma, and on another occasion the quotation ended at a colon—the remainder of the sentence in each case materially weakening the inference which it was intended to draw with the apparent sanction of the witness! Presence in Court.—In England medical and scientific witnesses, except under special circumstances, are allowed to be present in Court and hear the whole of the evidence in the case. This is in some instances absolutely neces- sary if the Court requires medical opinions, for unless the witnesses are fully acquainted with the facts they can give no opinions, and they can only become fully acquainted with the ftxctsby being allowed to be present and hearing the evidence in court. If excluded, the judge or counsel will be compelled to read to the witness notes of the evidence before an opinion can be given, and it may then appear that some small point which counsel did not think of importance is omitted: this if known to the witness might, however, materially affect his opinion. A failure of justice is likely to occur when medical wit- nesses are excluded, and it is generally where there is no defence or a false defence that the right of excluding them is exercised. The rule in Scotland is diflferent; medical witnesses are there rigorously excluded from Court until after they have delivered their evidence. The examination of the witnesses for the Crown is followed by the defence of the prisoner, either in person or by his counsel, who acts throughout the part of an advocate, simply securing for his client every advantage the facts or the law may afford him. In other words, he sees that his client is strictly tried according to law, and not condemned contrary to law. A key to some of the difficulties which medical witnesses must be prepared to encounter will be found in the exposition given by Mr. Stephen of the


[46/1290 b21964944_0046.jp2]

xlii RULES RESPECTING THE tacit rules which regulate the duties of counsel for the prosecution iiiul defence:—'In practice it is universally admitted that the counsel for the prosecution is morally and professionally bound always to keep in sight the ultimate object—namely, the discovery of truth; whereas no such obligation is laid upon the prisoner and those who represent him, because it is too much to expect of human nature that they should discharge it, and it is better not to impose an obligation which is sure to be systematically violated. Both sides, on the other hand, are bound in the strongest way not to do anything to propagate falsehood. The counsel for the Crown is bound not to suppress any flict within his knowledge flivourable to the prisoner; and, on the other hand, the counsel for the prisoner is bound not to bring to light facts within his knowledge xmfavourable to the prisoner. ' The counsel for the Crown may not use arguments to prove the guilt of the prisoner which he does not him- self believe to be just, and he is bound to warn the jury of objections which may diminish the weight of his arguments: in short, as far as regards the evidence which he brings forward, his speech should as much as possible resemble the summing-up of the judge. He should contend not for the success of his caiise at all events, but for the full recognition by the judge and jury of that side of the truth which makes in favour of it. On the other hand, the counsel for the prisoner may use arguments which he does not believe to be just. It is the business of the jury, after hearing the judge, to say whether they are or are not just.' (Op. cit. j^p. 160 and 168.) The last remark shows what appears to be a serious defect in the administration of the criminal law. While in a case of misdemeanour a prisoner may be tried by a special jury, in a case of felony, involving an analysis of important questions of medical science in reference to murder or manslaughter, the trial takes place before a common and comparatively ignorant jury. Such a jury is hardly in a position to cope Avith an ingenious counsel, Avho has it in his power to misrepresent and distort medical facts and opinions in any manner that he pleases. The chapters on Infanticide will furnish numerous illustrations of the measure Avhich counsel take of the intellectual capacity of common juries. The defences made are frequently such as no man would venture to place before a jury of educated men. These ' powerful' or ' forcible ' addresses, as they are termed by the press, fidl of burning eloquence and impassioned logic, have frequently withdrawn the attention of the jiiry from the real facts, and have procured verdicts of acquittal contrary to the evidence and all the medical circumstances of the case. Another observation made by Mr. Stephen more nearly concerns the me- dical witness :—' There are many obligations which affect each side equally. Neither is at liberty to attempt to browbeat, intimidate, or confuse a witness, altliough they may expose any real confusion Avhich exists in his mind, or test, by the strictest cross-examination, the accuracy of his statements. Neither is at liberty wilfully to misunderstand a witness, or to misstate, in his address to the jury^ the effect of what he has said, either by distortion or suppression. The neglect or observation of these and other i-ules of the same kind practically establishes a wide distinction, and one which is easily recog- nized, between those who exercise a noble profession and those who dis"-race it.' (Op. cit. p. 168.)


[47/1290 b21964944_0047.jp2]

xliii EXAMINATION OF JNIEDICAL WITNESSES. The treatment of a medical witness, in passing through the ordeal of an examination at a criminal trial, will depend therefore very much upon the class of counsel who is opposed to him. Assuming that he is properly pre- pared for the discharge of his duties, and that the questions put to him are answered fairly and truly, according to his knowledge and experience, without exaggeration or concealment, he has no reason to fear any attempt at intimi- dation. BaiTisters, for the most part, know that by this line of conduct they, lose more with the jury than they gain by the attempt to confuse the witness; and as their ultimate and sole object is a favourable verdict, they Avill generally avoid conduct which must necessarily place this verdict in jeopardy. The normal barrister, as depicted by Mr. Fitzjames Stephen, is not at liberty, in his address to tlie jury, to misrepresent, either by distortion or sup- pression, the medical facts or opinions given in a case. According to my experience, however, misrepresentation is a not unfrequent practice, and one of which medical witnesses have very strong reason to complain. Whether such misstatements are wilfxd or not it may be difficult to determine, but their effect on the jury is well known to those Avho employ them, and they frequently escape the observation of the counsel on the other side, and even of the learned judge, unless he happens to be well versed in medical subjects. It is also worthy of remark, that if a misstatement is tlms made, it is by a remarkable coincidence always in favour of the view of the counsel who makes it, when a proper examination of his notes would, in general, show him that he was wrong. Then as to the question of intimidation, this is sometimes carried very far. On a trial for murder by poisoning, I have heard a respectable country prac- titioner, who had given his evidence for the CrowiT in a fair and proper manner, thus addressed in cross-examination by a learned counsel now de- ceased :—* On your oath, sir, and in the face of the whole profession, will you venture to persist in that statement ?' &c. It may be that criminal cases fall more into the hands of the second class of barristers to whom Mr. Stephen alludes—namely, those who disgrace a noble profession. But it is a widely- spread opinion in the medical profession, that this style of examining educated men, who are perhaps compelled most unwillingly to appear on a subpoena to testify to facts, is certainly not adapted to elicit the truth, but rather to favour the escape of criminals and give impunity to crime. It may be fairly admitted that a man who puts himself forward as a witness, and attempts to elucidate what he only succeeds in rendering more obscure, should receive no favour at the hands of the bar. Dr. Elwell, a member of the legal as well as of the medical profession, observes that—' No witness is ever compelled to appear and testify to what he does not know. He may be com- pelled to attend in Court in obedience to a subpoena; but if he attempts to testify upon a subject requiring opinions upon Avhich he has no Avell-settled or Avell-defined ideas, it is his own fault, and he alone is to blame; for no one but himself can know so well as he, until he has exposed himself, hoAV imfit he is for the occasion.' (Medico-legal Treatise on ' Malpractice and Medical Evidence,' by J. J. Elwell, M.D., Member of the Cleveland Bar, New York,


[48/1290 b21964944_0048.jp2]

xliv PRIVILEGES OF COUNSEL. 1860, p. 302.) But let us take the case of a practitioner who, in a country district, has gone through twenty years of practice with honour and credit in his neighbourhood, and who is suddenly called to a case in which a man is foimd dead from a wound in his throat. Under the Medical Witnesses' Act he is compelled to make an examination of the body for a Coroner's inquest. At a great loss of time, and for no adequate remuneration, he attends the inquest and gives his evidence; he is boimd over, nolens volens^ to appear for the first time as a witness at a criminal trial, and to testify, 1st, to the throat being cut, and 2ndly, to give his opinion to the Court on the cause of death, and whether the wound was inflicted by the deceased on himself, or by another per- son. A medical man who limited himself to the statement of the bare fact that the deceased's throat was cut need not appear at all, for this evidence might be supplied by a constable or policeman; but the law presumes from his pro- fession, that the medical man made a jjroper examination of the wound, with a view to determine, to the best of his ability, whether it was the cause of death, and whether it was or Avas not self-inflicted. It is difficult to under- stand how a medical man, although before this occurrence he may never have seen a case of cut-throat, could excuse himself from giving answers to these questions, both of Avhich involve purely matters of opinion. If he excused himself altogether from giving answers, there would be a failure of justice, and no conviction for such a common form of murder could ever take place. If, on the other hand, he ansAvers these questions to the best of his ability, he may reasonably complain that while thus compelled to appear as a witness to testify to what he does know, his evidence should, by rules of law, be made the subject of abuse and ridicule before his neighbours, when he expresses his opinion from the facts; and that the counsel who examines him legally possesses an unlimited power of misrepresenting his views. A medical man is certainly not benefited by being described as an ignoramus or a blunderer in his profession, whom no one ought to trust. The truth is, in medical evidence facts and opinions cannot be separated; and if medical practitioners were restricted in their evidence only to those facts Avhich they obsei"ved in a case in which no other professional man saw the person livin"' or dead, it is difficult to understand how crime could be detected and punished. These remarks of course do not apply to cases in Avhich the opinions of medical experts can be taken. Here it Avould be desirable that one who has not had experience on the siibject .should avoid giving any opinion ; he might simply state the facts, and decline for want of experience to give an opinion on the conclusions to Avhich they lead. In pursuing any other course, he will find that the Avhole weight of the cross-examination will fall upon him. There are other remarks on this subject made by Dr. Elwell, which those who are compelled to attend as witnesses in a Court of Law Avill do well to bear in mind :—' However anxious an incompetent witness may be to appear learned, and however hard he may labour to shoAV it, he Avill ever find it a difficult business to make the Court and counsel believe that he is really so To appear really learned, he must be able to make the subject on which he gives an opinion clear, and to give satisfactory reasons for this opinion, lie


[49/1290 b21964944_0049.jp2]

xlv EXILES FOR THE DELIVERY OF EVIDENCE. must be not only a thinker, but must satisfy others that he is master of the subject. Take ahnost any one of the important scientific qiiestions upon which a professional witness is called to pass an opinion, and unless he has looked at the subject before with a purpose to understand it—comprehending its extent, weight, and relations—he will find it to have suddenly assumed an im- portance he had not suspected, just at the time when the discovery will add to his confusion. It is better to make this discovery in the quiet stillness and security of solitude, than under the eye of a judge and the severe scrutiny of coimsel. A man, whether learned or not—whether in court or out of court—will talk clearly upon a subject he well understands, whether it is scientific or otherwise; but unless it is clear in his own mind his account of it will be confused and unsatisfactory.^ (Op. cit. p. 303.) This is undoubt- edly the test to which every man should rigorously submit himself before entering the witness-box. The case should be viewed in all possible asj^ects, and if an opinion has been formed, it should be dealt Avith and criticised as if it were that of an adversary. As in controversy, a disputant shoidd put him- self as much as possible into the position of his antagonist, and see the question from his point of view. In this kind of self-examination it may be well to remember two points—1st, tliat there is no opinion so certain as that the human mind, if left to itself, will not infallibly raise a difference of opinion uj)on it; and 2ndly, that a man is never so near an error as when he claims a complete immunity from error. Joules for the delivery of Evidence.—There are a few rules bearing upon medical evidence which, if observed, may save the witness from interruption or reproof and place him in a favourable position with the Court:— 1. The questions put on either side should receive direct answers, and the manner of the witness should not be perceptibly different whether he is reply- to a question put by the counsel for the prosecution or for the defence. For reasons elsewhere assigned (p. xxxix), most of the questions put by counsel in cross-examination will admit of an answer ' yes' or ' no'. If, from the ingenious or casuistical mode in which the question is framed, the witness should feel that the simple affirmative or negative might mislead the Court^ then, after giving the answer, he can appeal to the judge to allow him to qualify it, or add to it any matter within his oivn knoivledge and which is at the same time relevant to the case. The witness must remember that he takes an oath to state the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth. On the other hand, while the counsel for the defence is bound not to introduce falsehood, his object is not the discovery or development of truth. Unless the witness is on his guard, he may find that his affirmatives and negatives may be worked into a shape representing the reverse of what he intended, when the learned counsel who has cross-examined him addresses the jury. Some coimsel adopt the ingenious plan of compressing two or three questions into one. A witness unthinkingly answers the last, or that which most fixes his attention. The same answer may not be strictly applicable to all, but the witness may find, when too late, that it is made so in the defence. In this case he should ask for a severance of the questions and give separate replies.


[50/1290 b21964944_0050.jp2]

xlvi EULES FOR THE DELIVERY OF EVIDENCE. Direct answers are necessary, because it is only by them that the case can be brought clearly before the Coiu-t and jury in all its details. Medical witnesses sometimes forget this, and fall into answers to questions floating in their own minds, or which they think are likely to be put to them. They are also sometimes disposed to anticipate many questions by one general answer. This simply creates confiision, and the witness will be told by counsel to keep to the question, and that he is coming to the other matters presently. In a case involving a question of compensation for personal injury as a result of a railway accident, tried at the Autunm Assizes of 18G5, medical Avitnesses were called on both sides. The reporter of the trial observes, in reference to the evidence of one of the medical witnesses for the plaintiff: ' In the course of a long cross-examination, this witness appeared to avoid giving " direct" answers to the questions put to him, and to affect to misunderstand them, to such an extent as to draw from his lordship the remark, " Do pray, Dr. , be a little more candid." ' From some other judges a witness thus acting would have met Avith a much more severe rebiike. A witness should remember, at all times, that he takes an oath to state the whole truth. Care should be taken by the medical witness not to argue with the learned counsel. Argument is not evidence, and the entering into it disturbs the order of the proceedings. Arguments between counsel and witnesses, and even between medical witnesses themselves, are freely allowed in the French Cottrts, but in England such a practice is not recognized. The mode in which questions are put by coimsel in cross-examination sometimes tends to the introduction of argument, but the witness should avoid the temptation to enter into it. What he says under such circumstances is not evidence, except in the form of answers to questions, and he is there only for the pur- pose of stating what is relevant to the case. There is a difference between evidence and testimony. A medical witness sometimes gives much in the form of testimony which amounts to very little as evidence. When he does not attend to the questions, he testifies to a variety of subjects which have no bearing on the case, and do not constitute evidence. The decision on what is and what is not evidence lies with the judge. 2. The replies should be concise, distinct and audible, and, except where explanation may be necessary, they should be confined strictly to the terms of the question. The learned judge who tries the case, generally takes full notes of the medical evidence—hence the necessity for a slow and distinct delivery of the evidence. Some witnesses have a singular habit of not ansAvering the question which is asked, but one Avhich is not asked. Others give an answer in such a voluble form, in the shape of a small speech or lecture, that there is great difficulty in reducing it to its proper proportions. A witness Avho is so pro- fuse of information genera.lly supplies abundant matter for a long and trouble- some cross-examination. He voluntarily places himself on the mensa lanionia It has been a question whether a Avitness should volunteer evidence,


[51/1290 b21964944_0051.jp2]

xlvii KULES FOR THE DELIVERY OP EVIDENCE. assuming that the examination-in-chief and cross-examination have not brouo-ht out all that he knows of the case. If that which he has to state is some matter of fact within his own knowledge, or an opinion based on facts within his knowledge, he will be allowed, on appHcation to the judge, to make the statement in spite of the efforts of counsel on either side to shut it out. It is scarcely necessary to observe, that the language in which the answers are returned should neither be flippant nor metaphorical. Comisel who are unacquainted with medical tei-ms fi-equently misapply them, or use them in a wrong sense. There are few barristers who are aware that the term ' symptom ' is confined to the living body, and ' appearance' to the dead; and the witness may thus find himself questioned on the ' appearances ' when he first saw the patient, or the ' symptoms' which he observed on the post-mortem examination of the stomach and bowels. On a trial for murder, in which one of the questions at issue Avas whether dysentery or poison was the cause of death, the learned counsel puzzled one of the medical witnesses by asking him whether during his attendance he found any traces of' dysuria ' in the fseces ! There is no doubt he intended a state of the forces like that met Avith in dysentery, but the professional term employed by him signified a ' difficidty in passing urine.' A judicious witness will avoid anything like a triumph over his examiner under such circumstances, and simply put him right. 3. Answers to questions should be neither ambiguous, undecided, nor evasive. An ambiguous answer necessarily leaves the witness's meaning doubtful, and calls for an explanation. An undecided answer—indicated by the words ' I belieA^e,' or ' I think,' or ' It might be,'—is not sufficient for evidence. Did the wound cause death ? Was death caused by loss of blood or poison ? If, by a proper consideration of all the medical facts, the Avitness has come to a conclusion on the subject, his answer should be expressed in plain and decided language, either in the affirmative or negative. A man who has formed no conclusion is not in a position to give evidence. No opinion should be given for which the Avitness is not prepared to assign reasons, and, except by permission of the Coiirt, no medical opinion should be expressed on facts or circumstances observed by others. A hesitating witness will be met Avith the question. Have you any doubt about it? or, Was it so or not ?—to Avhich a reply in the affirmative or negative must be given. If the witness fairly entertains doubts about the matter at issue, it is his duty to express them, and not alloAV them to be extorted from him piecemeal by a series of questions. Chemical Avitnesses have occasionally certified to the discovery of * imper- ceptible,' ' unmistakable,' or ' undoubted' traces of poison in the liver, &c. Such terms naturally convey to the shrewd mind of the examiner that the Avitness has some lurking doubt or suspicion of mistake in his mind, for that of Avhich we are sure requires no such terms to express our meaning. If poison has been discovered, the statement of the fact is sufficient. 4. The replies shoidd be made in simple language, free from technicality, v Some remarks have been elseAvliere made in reference to the use of technical


[52/1290 b21964944_0052.jp2]

xlviii MEDICAL AND SCIENTIFIC EXPERTS. terms in drawing up medico-legal reports (p. xxv). If medical men could be made aware of the ridicule which they thus bring on their evidence, otherwise good, they would at once strive to dispense with such language. A witness is perhaps unconsciously led to speak as if he Avere addressing a medical assembly, instead of plain men like the members of a common jury who are wholly ignorant of the meaning of medical terms, and barristers who are but imperfectly acquainted with them. Thus a medical man will speak of the ' integuments of the cranium ' instead of the ' skin of the head,' and a common cut is invariably described as an ' incision.' At p. 384 the reader will find a most erudite and elaborate description of a ' black eye,' which for a time bewildered the Court, until it was resolved by the learned judge into these two simple words, the meaning of which every one in Court could under- stand. In a case of child-murder, a medical witness who was asked to state the cause of death said that it was owing to ' atelectasis and general engorge- ment of the pulmonary tisstie.' This is not science, but pedantry; and if such language is employed by a witness with a view of impressing the Court Avith some idea of his learning, it wholly fails of its effect. Barristers and reporters put down their pens in despair, and tlie time of the Court is wasted until the witness has condescended to translate his ideas into ordinary language. Medical Experts.—In cases of a complicated nature and involving impor- tant interests, it is customary to call in medical or scientific experts, who, by reason of their special experience in certain branches of the profession, are presumed to be able to guide the Court to a proper vmderstanding of the facts of the case. In questions of legitimacy or divorce, obstetricians of high standing are consulted on both sides; in questions affecting the sanity of persons, those who have acquired a reputation in the treatment or observation of the insane are selected; in the various obscure injuries resulting from railway acci- dents, surgeons of repute,—and in questions of life-insurance, physicians of high standing are summoned as experts to give the results of their experience. There are many of these cases, including some in criminal law, which could not possibly be settled without this collateral aid—the questions at issue not being based on matters of fact occurring within the ordinary range of practice, so much as on an enlarged experience in a particular department. There is, how- ever, a strong public feeling against the admission of the testimony of experts. One able writer remarks :—' It is impossible to shut out such evidence alto- gether, but there is nothing Avhich brings more discredit upon the administration of justice. There is one conseqxience of its admission which is common to all cases in which it occurs : it is, that no difficulty has ever been found in - obtaining any amount of evidence of this description, on either side of any point in issue. There is a contest as to whether a vitriol or a gas manufactory is a nuisance. Twenty chemists of fair character and scientific acquirements come forward to swear that the effluvia evolved by these processes are pro- ducing the most deadly fevers, and twenty others equally eminent will give just as positive testimony that the gases are absolutely wholesome, and rather fattening than otherwise. These things are of everyday experience.'


[53/1290 b21964944_0053.jp2]

THE EVIDENCE OF SIEDICAL EXPERTS. xlix It will frequently be the duty of a medical expert, in civil as well as in criminal cases and in all actions for malapraxis, to pass an opinion on the practice of another professional man. On such occasions, wliile there should be no suppression of the truth, a witness is bovmd, in answering ques- tions put to him by counsel, to state his opinion and the gi-ounds on which it is based clearly and distinctly. It may be hard to condemn a brother- practitioner, but it would be still harder to ignore the public interest, and con- denm ovu'selves and our profession by concealing that which we know to be true, or by suppressing what we honestly believe. There is no etiquette in the profession which demands such a sacrifice of principle as this conduct involves. A medical Avitness is not bound to be forward in pointing out and suggesting defects, or in endeavouring to lower another practitioner in the opinion of the public ; but nothing should be concealed which is relevant to the elucidation of the case in issue. The golden rule, ' Do unto others as you would that they should do unto you,' should be strictly observed on these occasions. Certain lunacy cases of recent occurrence, and cases of compensation for bodily injury by railway accidents, have drawn particular attention to the testimony of experts. Lord Westbury, in referring to experts in lunacy in the Windham case, remarked that they came forward to swear away the sanity of persons, and when their reasons were examined it was found that persons asserted to be insane could not answer questions which some of the witnesses themselves were unable to answer. ' The absence of explicit statement,' said Lord "Westbury, ' was abundantly made up by a How of hard names, which no doubt had great Aveight Avith the jury. " I should call imsoimdness of mind a mixture of chronic mania and dementia,'''' said one doctor; " speaking in popular langiiage, I should call it a mixture of mania and flituity occurring in a person once having a sane understanding." Another learned physician examined the same lady, no doubt Avith great cleverness, and thought he Avould try her knoAvledge of law. He therefore asked her several questions about the Constitution, but Avhen similar questions were addressed to him by counsel he himself betrayed considerable uncertainty and hesitation. In an examination of an alleged lunatic in another of these cases, she was asked how much 100/. a-year would give per week; she was not able to tell, and this was relied on as a proof of her insanity ; but upon cross-examination of the medical man Avho was giving evidence of her lunacy, he Avas asked whether he himself could tell how much per Aveek 100/. a-year Avould give : he hesitated. He Avas then asked Avhether he did not knoAv or declined to tell; his reply was that he declined to tell.' It cannot be denied that experts have frequently introduced into their evidence speculative fancies and idle theories, not wan-anted by a proper induction from the facts; but it is quite clear that in all trials requiring special knoAvledge, if justice is to be administered, the Court must be assisted by those who possess that knoAvledge. I have elseAvhere suggested the cause of the evil, and Avhat I believe would prove a remedy (pp. 564 and 1072). The cause of the evil is that the solicitors on each side are alloAved to search the whole profession, imtil they can find one or more persons ready to adopt their c


[54/1290 b21964944_0054.jp2]

1 THE EVIDENCE OF EXPERTS. respective views; and when once in Court, provided a man can call himself a ' doctor,' his qualifications and experience sometimes escjipe a rigid scrutiny. Persons have thrust themselves or been thrust into cases as experts without any pretensions to such a title, either by their professional standing or experi- ence. A man who may have been engaged only in the ordinary routine of medical practice, and who may have had no special experience on the subject on which an opinion is required, will be described by his counsel ' as a most eminent member of the profession, on Avhose opinion the juiy are as much entitled to rely as on that of the very respectable gentleman called on the other side,' &c. The nomination of experts as witnesses by the judge Avho ti-ies a case, or by the Lord Chancellor in his department, would do aAvay with most of the objections which now tell with so much force against the evidence of experts. As long as they can be retained by either party—and the profession is large enough to furnish a great variety of experts—so long will the objections to the present system continue, and the good be confounded with the bad. But even men of professional skill and position sometimes give cause for censure. An expert is usually called to give an opinion on a certain state of facts laid before the Court in the evidence of other witnesses : thus certain appearances may be described as having been seen in the stomach or brain, and he may be asked to state the conclusions to which such appearances lead. A medical practitioner may describe accurately Avhat he sees, but may not have sufficient experience to draw a connect conclusion. In this case an expert may differ from him and totally alter the bearing of tlie case. So a man may describe certain symptoms Avhich an expert may say are or are not consistent with poisoning, but he must take care that he does not alter or distort the facts deposed to by other witnesses, in order to fit into the case his own theories or opinions. The alteration of fiicts to suit special views is by no means unfrequent, and an expert Avho thus deliberately mangles the evidence of others cannot escape the charge of being a partisan or an advo- cate in the case—a character wholly inconsistent with that of a witness, Avho should aim to be in all tilings impartial. A glaring instance of this kind occurred at the Guildford Summer Assizes of 18G2, in an action against a rail- Avay company for damages for personal injury. The condition of the plaintiff was accurately described by his medical attendant. Some eminent surgeons who had examined him Avere called as experts to depose to his present and probably future condition. Other equally eminent sm-geons Avere called as experts on the part of the Company, and they differed (as Avell they might) on the speculative question Avhen the man Avas likely to recover entirely from the effects of this accident. One of the most distinguished surgical experts for the defence, however, began by saying that plaintiff had only sustained a ' con- siderable shake ;' but shakes are not commonly recognized as surgical accidents and the surgeon on the other side had described this, from actual examination' as a * concussion of the spine.' But the witness continued—' And as to Avhat Avas said of congestion of the fibrous tissue, it was mere phraseology not in- dicating actual facts.' The learned judge who tried the case observed that ho could hardly take


[55/1290 b21964944_0055.jp2]

MISCONDUCT OF EXPERTS. li that as evidence. ' The witness must state facts, or his opinion from facts.' The witness then disputed the facts, but the learned judge told him that he had no right to do so, and that he must give his opinion on the facts as proved. In these few words are defined the whole of the duties of an expert who presents himself as a witness. The above example shows clearly w^hat ouglit to be avoided, and it corroborates an observation elsewhere made (p. xix.) that the greatest professional knowledge and skill may coexist with an entire ignorance of the proper methods of employing this knowledge to aid the admi- nistration of justice. Some Chemical experts have shown so little sense of their true position in Court, that at important trials they have not only altered the facts given in evidence to suit the views of the accv;sed for whom they appeared, but they have described their own analyses as those only on which reliance shoiild be placed. They have claimed almost exclusive experience in the scientific matter at issvie, and have denounced as incon-ect, before a tribunal utterly incapable of forming a judgment on such subjects, the chemical processes of experts of equal standing on the other side ! A chemist who was giving evidence as an expert in a patent case, at a trial before the late Baron Alderson, was asked by his counsel whether he had had much experience on the subject then under inquiry. He replied by saying that he had had very considerable experience, more than most chemists, and was apparently about to announce himself before the Court as the sole standard of what was correct in that department of science ; when the learned judge interrupted him with the remark,—' Do not praise yourself or your proceedings, sir; the jury wiU estimate the value of your evidence when they come to consider the whole of the case.' Men who thus act damage not only the cause on which they are summoned, but they bring scandal on the evidence of experts in general. The subject of experts, and the mode in which their evidence should be received, has been ably handled, in a legal point of view, by Mr. Stephen (' Criminal Law,' p. 209). He objects to the proposition of referring scientific questions to them, even when nominated by the Court, and he considers a common jury better qualified than experts to deal with and decide on all points of scientific evidence. One of the reasons which he assigns for his objection will probably surprise the medical reader : it is, that experts so nominated and employed, i.e. as assessors to the judge and in the absence of a jury, would 07il?/ direct their minds to the truth. ' A juror,' he observes, ' is not a scientific inquirer, but a judge bound by oath to say whether or not certain evidence satisfies his mind; a scientific inquirer is not bound by any- thing of the kind.' He considers the suggestion to be based on a misappre- hension of the result to be reached, and the mode of reaching it: 'It assumes that the object of the inquiry is the attainment of truth simply, and that scientific men are more likely to attain it than others. To this it may be replied, that the result to be reached is not truth simply, but such an approach to truth as the average run of men arc capable of making, and that the result is more likely to be found in the opinions of common than scientific jurors.' c 2


[56/1290 b21964944_0056.jp2]

lii EXPERTS AS ASSESSORS. {Loc. cit.) On this it may be observed, that while experts have the samee power of dealing with common things as common jurors, they have an addi- tional special power of making that approach to truth on scientific subjects,; which common jurors certainly do not possess. It would also appear from thiss reasoning, that in a judicial inquiry aifecting a person charged Avith murder,, something less than truth is more satisfactory for the purposes of justice than i truth itself! But the question regarding this employment of experts as assessors, andl the avoidance of the imputation of their appearing as hired retainers in a case,, is practically answered in the Admiralty Courts. Four Masters of the Trinity - House, experienced in all the rules of navigation, give their opinions on ques- - tions submitted to them, as experts, by the Court; and without creating any charge of injustice in the decisions of the Court, they constantly guide these; decisions by answering certain difficult nautical questions. In a case in which.i two ships come into collision, both parties contend they are right, or the case ■ would not be litigated. The question tui*ns upon the respective positions of the • ships, the setting of certain sails, the direction of winds, tide and currents, andl whether the helm should have been ported or starboarded before the collision.. These nautical experts, as their opinions are now received, acquit themselves ■ with satisfaction ; but if such a trial took place before a jury, and each captain i were allowed to select his own experts as witnesses, there would be the same ■ dissatisfaction as that which now exists in reference to trials involving other • branches of scientific evidence. There can be no doubt that the present system discourages some eminent and upright men, who could by their special knowledge solve many important questions, from appearing as witnesses. I am and have been acquainted with several who have uniformly refused on this ground to attend as experts in a Court of Law. A distinguished chemist, a gentleman of strict honour and in- tegrity, was once asked by counsel,—in the first question put to him in cross- examination, 'When and by whom were you first retained in this case?' Without directly imputing bribery and perjury to the witness, the innuendo to the Court and jiu-y was to the effect that this gentleman had, like a lawyer, received his fee to maintain a client's cause, wholly irrespective of the oath which he had taken. As counsel on both sides look on the experts opposed to them in the light of hired advocates, it is obvious that so long as this system lasts it must have a deterring elFect on the higher and better class of witnesses, who whenever they have the option, will avoid placing themselves in such a posi- tion as to have imputations of venality and untruthfulness thrown out against them in a public Court. In a correspondence with the late Dr. Andrew Combe of Edinburgh, many years since, he informed me that he had been consulted in a case in Avhich a gentleman was considered to be incompetent to manage his affairs. He says in his letter: 'I was required to go and examine him on twenty-four hours' notice, but 1 insisted first on receiving some account of him, and being allowed to form an unbiassed opinion of the results of the examination. With some difficulty I obtained his history, and on perusing it saw a strong probability that my opinion would be adverse to


[57/1290 b21964944_0057.jp2]

liii MEDICAL COUNSEL. those who consulted me. They of course professed pure impartiality, but it was manifest that my opinion was expected to confirm theirs. Had I been called by the Sheriff, for example, I might have given impartial evidence.' The late Dr. Baly, Dr. Munro, Dr. Wood, and myself were reqviired to give our opinions in a similar case. We insisted upon being allowed to make a full examination of the alleged lunatic, and the result was that our opinions were comjjletely adverse to those who consulted us, much to their disappoint- ment (see p. 1129). We declined to give evidence in the case. It is a fact I worthy of note, that even in criminal trials, where life is concerned, no provision is made by the English law for the calling by a judge of independent medical witnesses or experts, interested only in the manifestation of the truth. (Stephen.) Medical Counsel.—Some barristers, who feel themselves unable to discuss the medical bearings of a question, are in the habit of employing medical men to instruct them on the best mode of endeavouring to baffle medical witnesses, so as if possible to place the case in an equivocal light before a jury. In short, there are some in the profession always ready to act as medical counsel, and to be 'retained' for the prosecution or defence, as the case may be. It is obvious that even if interference were prudent, under the present system of summoning medical witnesses, the law could not in- terfere to check a practice which is certainly liable to lead to evil results: for the parties Avho give the suggestions wliich may suit the purpose of an ad- vocate do not always act as witnesses, and therefore cannot have their own means of knowledge or sources of experience fairly tested, while the selected medical facts or opinions which they may communicate to the advocate may have the intended effect of confusing the minds of the jury. Under these cir- cumstances, the result must depend on the acumen and medical knowledge possessed by the judge Avho tries tlie case. The question has been frequently asked. May not a medical witness ho- nestly take up the defence of a prisoner ? Is it always certain that the case for the prosecution is indisputably correct ? The latter question admits of a simple answer, which will show the course that may be fairly pursued. The evidence for a prosecution may involve a serious medical error, as well as the evidence for a defence. Assuming, from his knowledge of the ascertained facts of the case, a witness believes bond fide that the medical opinions for the prosecution are incorrect or contrary to his own experience, he has a right to interfere and point out what he considers to be an error of fact or opinion. What he has to state, however, in this behalf should be publicly stated on oath, so that his experience, motives, and honesty of purpose may be fairly and openly tested by a cross-examination. He should remember that his in- terposition is only justifiable in the interests of justice as well as of the public, and not in the personal interest of the accused. If he is retained and paid by the prisoner's legal advisers to defend the prisoner's interest, wholly irre- spective of the public interests, he is simply a medical counsel or advocate, and any professional opinions which he gives in the witness-box should be rejected on the principle that no advocate should be a witness and no witness


[58/1290 b21964944_0058.jp2]

MEDICAL COUNSEL. MANUFACTURE OF liv ail advocate. Under these circumstances his evidence is given for a special purpose and paid for accordingly, and it would be contrary to hviman nature to suppose that a Avitness so situated could give those free and unbiassed opi- nions which are requisite for the guidance of a jury. It is this kind of inter- ference, on the part of some medical and scientific witnesses, which has laid the whole profession under a general censure. When, as in certain criminal trials, men thus hire themselves solely for the purposes of a defence, i.e. to rescue an accused person from the penalty due to a crime which there may be sti-ong reason to believe he has committed, they may justly be called, in the language of a great lawyer, traffickers in evidence. It is not surprising to find that evidence should be manufactured on such occasions to meet the re- quirements of the defence. In one important case {Reg. v. Tawell, Aylesbury Assizes, 1845), a woman died from the effects of prussic acid, and a fatal quantity of that poison, amounting to one grain, was clearly discovered in the stomach of deceased by an experienced chemist. As, from the moral and cir- cvmistantial evidence, the guilt of the man could scarcely be disputed, an attempt was made to destroy the effect of the chemical evidence, and to im- pose on the common sense of the jury, by the statement that the deceased had eaten some apples, that the pips of apples contained the principles for pro- ducing prussic acid in the human stomach, and that the poison found in this case had resulted Avholly or in part from the apple-pips ! This monstrous chemical proposition met with no acceptance from the jury; they preferred the doctrines of common sense to this pseudo-scientific theory. The interference in this case for the defence could not have been based on any bond-fide belief that the chemical evidence for the prosecution, on Avhich the conviction of the prisoner chiefly turned, was untrustworthy. The inventors of this hypothesis had not the excuse that public justice, or the life of an innocent man, Avas in danger from any medical or chemical error; and the only other object Avhich can suggest itself is, that they Avorked to procure the acquittal of the prisoner by endeavouring to mystify the jury and mislead the Court on a simple scien- tific fact. A striking instance of an attempt to deceive a jury in a civil case, by manufactured chemical evidence, occurred a fcAV years since under my observation. An action Avas brought against a Company for alleged damage to cattle by the smoke of a flue connected with some lead-Avorks. It Avas said that plaintiff"s cattle had been poisoned to a great extent by the deposit of lead on the herbage for a great distance around. The grass, shrubs, hedges, &c. on the plaintiff's groimd underAvent an inspection or a vieAv before the trial by chemists on both sides, attended by some members of the special jury; but no deposit of lead could be seen anyAvhere, nor Avas any pointed out to those who attended on the part of the defendants. During the trial in Court, hoAvever, a cut branch of a tree was produced, and this Avas covered by a well-marked Avhite deposit (Avhite-lead), concerning which there could be no doubt whatever. The chemists on the part of the Company, however made this observation—the under-surfaces of the leaves Avere as much covered Avith Avhite-lead as the upper surfaces—a circumstance not consistent Avith the supposed deposit from a flue. But a still more surprising condition Avas


[59/1290 b21964944_0059.jp2]

Iv SCIENTIFIC EVIDENCE. noticed—the cut surface of the branch was as much covered Avith a wliite deposit as the bark and leaves. It was difficult to conceive that this coxild have arisen as a deposit fi-om a flue, and the facts appeai-ed to be only expli- cable on the theory that a branch of a tree had been secretly dipped into the defendant's lead-washings and dried,—the person who performed this experi- ment not having been sufficiently careful or thoughtful to keep out of the water the cut end of the branch ! This would probably have gone to the jury as evidence of a deposit of lead from the flue ; but, as the subject had attracted the special notice of defendants' witnesses, those who were interested in the plaintiff's case quietly withdrew the branch and thrust it vmder the table of the Court. Such practices are not calculated to give a high value to chemical evidence ; but I believe conduct of this kind to be quite exceptional. In civil cases it is not always easy to say, until the evidence has been heard in Court, whether scientific opinions should be in favour of plaintiff or defendant; and herein lies the great advantage arising from the opinions of scientific experts employed as assessors. There may be on each side a j)ortion of truth which will meet with its medical supporters, without any imputation upon their motives, any more than upon the motives of the members of a special jury, who, in spite of perfect absence of bias, cannot always agree. If, however, medical men, intending to act in the capacity of witnesses, lend themselves as advocates to the party consulting them, for the pur- pose of weakening or overthrowing the scientific evidence on the other side, in s])ite of its consistency with sound medical doctrines, then they lose sight of their true position, and justly expose themselves to severe censure. If, on hearing the evidence to facts on the side of the party con- sulting them, they find the complexion of the case altered, and that they cannot support it as they believed they were in a position to do, it is their duty to themselves and their profession as well as to the public interests—which are always superior to private interests—to withdraw from the case. No man should ever appear to support that which he does not believe to be true. Actions for compensation in railway accidents have brought to light some practices among certain members of the profession which have repeatedly called for the censure of the Bench. These persons have allowed themselves to be retained by the Company as surgeons to attend on those who have suffered injury ; they have then been employed to suggest terms for compensation, so as to avoid litigation, and if possible to keep the case out of Court. So far no public injury may possibly accrue, although the financial part of the transaction is in the province of an attorney, and not of a surgeon ; but when the case comes to trial, the matter assumes an entirely different aspect. The medical attendant of the Company, who has seen the injured plaintiff, but in tlie interest of the Company, and can probably give the best evidence of the injuries wdiich he has sustained, is so situated, that anything which he may say will necessarily have the taint of bias and self-interest. Medical men have thus been strongly condemned by judges for degrading their profession by lending themselves as money-agents for the defendants. Other practices, too, of a more remarkable nature have come to light. In


[60/1290 b21964944_0060.jp2]

Ivi MEDICAL COUNSEL AND MEDICAL WITNESSES CONTRASTED. n reported trial of this kind, which took place during the Summer Assizes of 18G5, there was a conflict of medical evidence respecting the condition of the plaintiff, the witnesses on one side tedcing the A'iew that he had sustained serious injury, and those on the other that he was either shamming or greatly exag- gerating his symptoms. One medical witness, who adopted the shamming theory, and who appeared on the part of the Company, had attended the plaintiff and prescribed for him, as an experiment, syrup and water, under which it was stated he improved ! This satisfied him that the man was shamming. It appeared, however, in cross-examination, that although the Avit- ness was paid for his services by the Company, he knew that the plaintiff be- lieved at this time that he was acting as his own medical attendant. This mode of getting up scientific evidence for the Company was justly and severely condemned by the learned judge who tried the case. A medical man's own judgment should suffice to prevent him fi-om falling into errors like these ; he thereby not only damages himself, but the profession of wliich he is a member. Men who adopt these practices should know that they are not in a position to give unbiassed evidence, and therefore should decline to appear as witnesses. Medical counsel and medical witnesses are differently placed in relation to a case under investigation. While the medical counsel may have undue weight given to his suggestions, in their being put boldly forward by the bai-rister who retains him, in forcible and impressive language, as ascertained medical truths, he entirely escapes that searching examination into his competency which is infallibly the lot of a medical witness; and again, while the latter is bound by his oath, without reference to the prosecution or defence, to state the tuJiole truth, the former is only obliged to give so much of the truth as may suit the case of the party for whom he appears. In short, like a bari-ister, he is not an advocate of any abstract principle of justice, but of the cause of his client. How far a medical man has a moral right to make use of his professional knowledge in order to embar- rass the testimony of those of his professional brethren who are compelled by law to appear and give evidence to the best of their ability, is an ethical question which it is here unnecessary to consider; but there can be no doubt, that while in some few instances the practice may work well, by preventing convictions from taking place upon erroneous opinions, it is liable in most cases to be perverted to the Avorst purposes. An imscrupulous man, who chose to make himself thoroughly acquainted with scientific subjects, might in this way so pervert the medical facts of a case, and lead to the con- fusion of witnesses who are not able to cope with him, as to procure an acquittal in face of the most convincing proofs of guilt. The remedy for this evil is in some measure with the medical witness himself. By having his mind fully prepared on the subject before entering the Avitness-box, he will have no occasion to fear an encounter with members of his own profession, thus disguisedly working against him. A plain statement of the whole truth, with the fact that he shows by his evidence that he has no end to serve but the public good, Avill enable him to put down the sophistry, medical or legal, that may be thus arrayed against him.


[61/1290 b21964944_0061.jp2]

Ivii CONFLICTING MEDICAL TESTIMONY. It has been strongly stated that no man acting as medical coimsel or adviser should on any occasion be allowed to act in the capacity of a witness. Undoubtedly a man who takes up a case with a view of dressing up the facts for one side only, and collecting evidence for defeating by mystification the case on the other side, is not in a position to act as a witness with any credit to himself, to his profession, or to those who summon him. His object is neither truth nor an approach to it, but rather the gaining of a victory per fas aut nefas. There is no law by which such persons can be prevented from acting as witnesses; but, as a rule, their evidence is either rejected or received with great distrust. Their conduct also, if carried on openly in court, might give rise to severe comments from the judge and opposing counsel. In some cases the cross-examination of such persons would be a benefit, since it might have the effect of showing that many of the questions which they had suggested in the case were based upon erroneous views or in ignorance of the real facts. A medical witness may, without any imputa- tion upon his bona Jides, explain medical points to coimsel, and correct him on medical subjects when wrong in his views or statements; but he should avoid even the appearance of prompting counsel in the conduct of the case. Conflicting Medical Testimony.—The conflict of opinion among medical witnesses and medical experts is a favourite theme of comment with a portion of the public. The reader AviU find some remarks on this subject at p. 1083, in reference to Commissions of Limacy. I have little to add to them, for similar remarks apply to all medico-legal cases which come before a Court of Law. That men should be found who can traffic in evidence is certainly a misfortune for the profession to which they belong, but differences of opinion on the same state of facts may fairly exist in the medical as well as in any other profession. If such differences come more before the public on medical or scientific questions, it arises from the fact that the cases de- manding: such evidence are far more numerous than those which affect the two other learned professions. In suits which involve the rights and duties of the clergy, there is seldom agreement among those who have to decide upon them as ecclesiastical authorities. So among members of the legal profession, and in the administration of justice generally, while barristers notoriously differ and give conflicting written opinions upon the same state of facts, special jurors, consisting of highly-educated men, are unable to agree in opinion, and are often discharged without a verdict, to the great injury of litigants. If in a great patent case, after a series of appeals, learned judges themselves differ toto caslo in the construction of the law, and are obliged to read conflicting written judgments seriatim, it may be surely permitted to scientific men also to differ conscientiously from each other without any imputation of interested motives. The fact that the venal evidence of' hired' experts or witnesses occasionally finds its way into a case, does not justify the sweeping denunciation of medical or scientific witnesses as a body. As Mr. Stephen remarks of the Law, so it may be said of Medicine—no system


[62/1290 b21964944_0062.jp2]

Iviii CONFLICTING MEDICAL TESTIMONY. of rules can fully embody that line of conduct by the observance of which those who exercise a noble profession with honour and credit are distin- guished from those who disgrace it. It is purely a matter of sentiment and good feeling. It is truly a sad day for science, as one learned judge remarked, when the conflict of opinion may be traced to the ignoble motives of a desire of gam or of notoriety, or of anything but a desire for truth. At the trial of WiUiavi Palmer (May 1856) the conflict of medical testimony is considered to have reached its maximum degree. The only question at issue was—' Death from strychnia or disease?' If the former was true, the guilt of the prisoner could not for one moment be questioned, as it was in evidence that Palmer had given to the deceased the food and medicine Avhich he took on the day of his death. The suggestion of suicide or accident could not be entertained. On the main fact, however, the conflict of testimony was only apparent, not rea', since one of the principal scientific witnesses for the prisoner admitted, when cross-examined by the leanied Attorney-General on the part of the Crown, that he had again and again asserted that this was a case of poisoning by strychnia, but that the scientific witnesses for the CroAvn had not known how to find the poison in the body of the deceased. If this was his honest conviction from the facts known to him, it is obvious that he was voluntarily placing himself in a false position in coming forward as a witness for the prisoner. In so appearing, however, and in taking an oath to state the ivhole truth, his evidence should have been to this effect: ' lam of opinion that the deceased died from strychnia;—no person can possibly die from strychnia Avithout some portion of the poison necessarily remaining in the dead body. It was not found in this case, because the chemical witnesses lor the Crown did not know how to find it. By my process I coiild have detected strychnia in this body.' Had this straightforward course been adopted, the Court and public would have seen at once that in the most material part of the case there was really no conflict of testimony. The juiy, as this witness well knew, were not there to decide upon the relative ability of chemical experts, or on the best process of analysis for detecting strychnia, but simply whether the de- ceased did or did not die ft-om this poison. The remarks of the learned Attorney-General upon the evidence of the witness who had thixs compromised himself convey in a few words a fair warning to all medical counsel who are inclined to imitate such an example as this:— ' I have seen that gentleman not merely contenting himself with coming forward, when called upon for the purpose of justice, to .state that Avhich he kncAv as a matter of science or of experiment, but I have seen him mixing himself up as a thorough-going partisan in this case, advismg my learned friend, sug- gesting question upon question, and that in behalf of a man Avhom he has again and again asserted he believed to be a poisoner by strychnia. I do not say that alters the fact; but I do say that it induces one to look at tlie credit of such witnesses with a very great amount of suspicion. I reverence a man Avho from a sense of justice and a love of truth—from those high considera- tions Avhich form the noblest elements in the character of man—comes forward


[63/1290 b21964944_0063.jp2]

CONFLICTING MEDICAL TESTIMONY. lix in favour of one against whom the world may run in a torrent of prejudice and aversion, and who stands and states what he beUevcs to be the truth; but I abhor the traffic in testimony to which I regret to say men of science some- times permit themselves to condescend.' (Report of Trial of W. Palmer, p. 287.) From these remarks, a medical witness will learn not only what he ought to do, but Avhat he ought not to do, in taking up the defence of a person who is charged Avith crime. The scandal attending such displays as these, whether considered in relation to science or jurisprudence, may, it appears to me, bo removed either by the appointment of experts as assessors to the' Court, or by giving a power to the judge to summon to his assistance independent scientific witnesses.


[64/1290 b21964944_0064.jp2]




[65/1290 b21964944_0065.jp2]

THE PRINCIPLES AND PRACTICE OF MEDICAL JURISPEUDENCE. CHAPTEE 1. QUESTIONS CONNECTED WITH THE DEAD BODY SIGNS OF DEATH CESSATION OF RESPIRATION AND CIRCULATION APPARENT DEATH TRANCE — COLDNESS OF THE BODY POST-MORTEM CALORICITY—RIGOR MORTIS CADAVERIC RIGIDITY CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH INFLUENCE ITS COMMENCEMENT AND DURATION OTHER INDICATIONS OF DEATH. Among the subjects which sometimes claim the attention of a medical jurist, in reference to the bodies of persons found dead, are the conditions known as real and apparent death, the proofs of death, and the priority of death. A knowledge of the changes which take place in the dead body at a recent, as well as a remote period, may be usefully applied to the determination either of the reality of death, a problem seldom involving difficulty, or of the period at which death took place, a question of considerable importance, and upon which the guilt or innocence of an accused person may frequently depend. Medical jurists have enumerated certain signs or indications of death. It will be neccssiiry to consider these in the order in Avhich they commonly pre- sent themselves to the observer. 1. Cessation of Circulation and Respiration.—The cessation of these two important functions is regarded as, in itself, sufficient to determine the reality of death. But persons have been resuscitated from a state of asphyxia; and others again have recovered from a state of lethargy or catalepsy, when to all appearance, the respiratory and circulating processes had been com- pletely arrested. Life is certainly not incompatible with a temporary suspen- sion of these two important functions; but, in making this admission, it is undeniable, that the processes must be speedily re-established, or death will assuredly follow. One remarkable case illustrative of the maintenance of life under a partial suspension of the action of the heart and lungs, is recorded by Dr. Cheyne. It is that of Colonel Townshend, who appears to have pos- sessed the power of voluntarily dying:—i. e. of so suspending the heart's action, that no pulsation could be felt. After lying in this state of lifelessness for a short period, active life became slowly re-established ; but Avithout any B


[66/1290 b21964944_0066.jp2]

2 APrARENT DEATH. IIYBERXATION. volition or consciousness on his part. The longest period during which he remained in this inanimate state, was about half an hour. It is probable, however, that the heart's action was not entirely suspended during the whole of this time, but that respiration and circulation were feebly continued at intervals; so slightly as to be imperceptible to the examiners, or to be indi- cated by a pulsadon of the radial artery. The stethoscope had not been then invented, and the method of detecting the sounds of the heart by auscultation was wholly unknown. A hybernating animal would appear to be dead under similar circumstances, but it is known that circulation and respiration still continue in a sufficient degree to maintain life. M. Bouchut has proved that during hybernation, an animal is simply in a state of apparent death. The vital functions are not arrested, but are reduced to their lowest ebb. Thus he found, in his experiments on the marmot, or mountain rat, that when the animal was in an active state, the pulsations of the heart were 90; while in the torpid state they were reduced to 8 or 10 in a minute. ('Ann. dTIygiene,' 1848, 2, 96.) In the case of Colonel Townshend, it is obvious that the action of the heart may have continued, although the pulse at the wrist and other parts of the body failed to indicate this. It appears that the Colonel really died nine hours after the performance of the experiment above men- tioned. His body was carefully examined, but nothing could be detected to account for the extraordinary power which he possessed over the action of the heart. This case, which rests upon good authority, must be regarded as altogether exceptional. It may, however, serve to throw some light upon the possible survivorship of persons, who have been exposed to death by drowning, and whose bodies may have been immersed in water for an unusual period of time. In some works on the subjects of apparent death and asphyxia, cases are recorded which are intended to show that respiration and circidation may be suspended for many hours, and yet the person be living. It is impossible to place any credit on narratives of this description, which generally rest upon hearsay or conjectural evidence. To suppose that the two important functions of respiration and circulation can be wholly suspended for even an hour, in a hiuuan being, Avithout destroying life, is to set at defiance all physiological experience. Admitting the possibility of such a case occurring, it would require the best and most unequivocal evidence to support it. The pheno- mena of hybernation in many animals can have no reference to this condition : for in these, a final purpose is answered by the feeble state of existence into which they are thrown. While it is natural for such animals to remain torpid during the winter season, or to exist under a feeble exercise of their functions of respiration and circulation, it would be an unnatural condition for a human being, and inconsistent with the maintenance of life There are some forms of disease affecting the nervous system, as, for example, hysteria accompanied by tetanus, or coma,—and catalepsy, the symp- toms of which are occasionally such, as closely to simiTlate death. Eespiration and circulation appear either to cease entirely, or to be carried on so feebly, that, to uninformed observers, the persons affected, may seem to be really dead. Catalepsy, or, as it is vulgarly called, trance, in which the person lies in an unconscious state, may thus assume the appearance of death; but the warmth of the body is retained, the limbs are flexible, and the heart and luno-s continue to act, although less vigorously than natural. Cases of prolono-ed and profound sleep of a natural kind, which have also been described^as cases of trance, cannot be mistaken for death. Dr. Cousins met with a remark- able instance which may be taken as the type of others. A man of liealthV habits, forty-three years of age, was at intervals subject to attacks of lon^ and persistent sleep. He would retire to bed at his usual hour, and without


[67/1290 b21964944_0067.jp2]

CASES OF UNNATURAL SLEEP. TRANCE. 3 any warning symptoms, suddenly and almost immediately fall into a profound sleep, from which all the usual means would fail to arouse him. In this state, his face and ears were pale ; the skin was pale and generally Avarm, but his feet were cold and livid, and the limbs quite relaxed. His pulse was soft, slow, and feeble; his respirations almost imperceptible, amounting to about eight or nine in a minute. He appeared like a person in a refreshing, tran- quil slumber. There was no stertor or snoring. The longest period he ever passed in profound sleep, was five days and five nights. He frequently slept three days and occasionally four days without waking, but his average period was two days. His secretions were suppressed, and no food was required. He commonly awoke suddenly, had no consciousness of the lapse of time, and retained a good remembrance of the la^t occurrences before he fell into this state. He had no dreams. (' Medical Times and Gazette,' April 18, 18G3, p. 39G.) A similar case, from the ' Gazette Medicale,' is reported in the ' Edinburgh Monthly Journal' for April 1845. A married woman, thirty-six years of age, became subject to attacks of prolonged sleep or trances, lasting from two to seven days, but usually about five days. They occurred suddenly Avithout warning, sometimes diuring the night, and sometimes during the day. After twenty-four hours she was half roused, and her lips moistened with liquids Avhich she swallowed insensibly, again falling asleep immediateljf afterwards. These trances generally occurred at intervals of from two to twenty days, during Avhich she had no regular sleep, or, if any, it was short and disturbed. The evacuations were suspended during this state. It was found impossible to rouse her; but she awoke spontaneously, feeling much fatigued and not refreshed by this unnatural sleep. When an eyelid was lifted, the eye Avas found to be fixed upAvards ; light did not cause her pupils to contract. The respiration, circulation, and temperature of the body were in their original state, during and after these trances. (' Gazette Medicale,' January 1845 ; and ' Edinburgh Monthly Journal,' April 1845, p. 307.) It has been demonstrated by Mr. Durham, that in ordinary sleep, there is a AvithdraAval of a due supply of blood from the capillary vessels of the brain. The remarkable fact is, that the proper supply of this fluid to the brain, should be so long Avithdrawn or suspended, Avithout producing serious injvuy to the nervous system. This condition appears to be a kind of human hybernation. It could not be mistaken for death, even by the most ignorant observer, con- sidering that respiration and circulation are still carried on, and the Avarmth of the body is retained. Certain tests have been proposed for the purpose of ascertaining whether these processes have ceased or not. It is unnecessary to allude to them, because they appear to be wholly inadeqiiate to the purpose intended; but in the absence of all appearance of movement in the chest and abdomen, a medical man may readily satisfy himself of the fact of respiration and circulation continuing or not, by the occasional application of a stethoscope, or of the ear itself, to different parts of the chest,—especially to the region of the heart. The auscultatory test, applied at intervals dui-ing half an°hour, cannot fail to lead to a satisfactory conclusion. This test, first pro- posed by M. Bouchut, and rewarded by the French Academy Avith a prize, as being the most certain method of proving death before putrefaction, has been objected to by Dr. DoAvler, 1, because the heart itself may, like other muscles, be in a state of apparent, and not real death ; and 2, because the pul- sations and sounds of this organ may not ahvaysbe appreciable to the ear, even Avhen aided by the stethoscope. In support of these objections, it is stated that M. Brachet has repeatedly restored the vitality of neAv-bom children, iuAvhoni no pulsation Avhatever could be discovered for a period of fifteen to thirty B 2


[68/1290 b21964944_0068.jp2]

4 PROOFS OF DEATH. CESSATION OF THE CIRCULATION. minutes after birtli. In one instance a child was revived after tiventij mimites of apparent death, by insufflation of the hings, although during that time no pulsation could be heard or felt. Another case was that of a man, ajt. thirty-three, Avhose heart presented no contraction that could be detected during at least eight minutes, although the ear was applied again and again. Twenty minutes after the suspension of its action, a slight contraction was per- ceived in the heart, its pulsations then became regular, and the patient opened his eyes. ('Philadelphia Medical Examiner,' Oct. 1850, p. 599.) To these mav be added the case of Colonel Townshend, which carries the supposed period of the entire suspension of the heart's action to half an hour. Such cases however do not show that a person can live while the heart's action is thus continuously suspended, but that the means employed for testing the state of this organ have been imperfectly or carelessly applied. In awarding the Manni prize, founded for the discovery of a certain sign of death, the French Commissioners, Duneril, xindi-al, Magendie, Serres, and Eayer, very properly dwelt upon the state of the heart as furnishing the most unecpiivocal j^roof of death before the occurrence of cadaveric rigidity and putrefaction. M. Bouchut, to whom the i^rize was awarded in 184G, found, in an extensive series of researches, experimentally confirmed by the Commissioners themselves, that in all cases of apparent death, whether arising from asphyxia or syncope, there is one common character by which they may be distinguished from real death, and that is, a continuance of the pulsations of the heart. He established the fact, that in the most perfect state of syncope, attended with entire loss of motion and sensation, as well as cool- ing of the body, the contractions of the heart were not really at any time suspended, but simply reduced in force and frequency. In syncope from haemorrhage, carried to the fullest extent, and in cases in which respiration was either imperceptible, or carried on at long intervals, the body at the same time having the aspect of a coi-pse, he was enabled by auscultation, to detect the pulsations of the heart, and thus to distinguish apparent from real death. In children born in a state of apparent death, and in cases of asphyxia from any cause, in narcotic poisoning, hysterical and epileptic coma, and in all diseases which have been stated to resemble apparent death, the living has been easily distinguished from the dead body by the continuance of the heart's action—this was feeble and took place at intervals, but it was ^always sufficiently marked to enable a professional man to distinguish a living from a dead body. It was considered important, if possible, to define the periods at which, after the entire cessation of the heart's action, a person might be pronounced dead. Assuming that the last audible expiration has been made, that the motions of the chest have apparently ceased, and that no pulsation can be felt in any of the arteries of the neck or limbs, the longest interval that elapsed between the pulsations of the heart was about six seconds. M. Eayer, one of the Commissioners, fi-om his own observations on the dying, assigned as a maxi- mum, an interval of seven seconds between the last pulsations of this oro-an. If, therefore, no motion of the heart is perceived during an interval of five minutes, a period which is fifty times as great as that which observa- tion waiTants, death may be regarded as certain. With the cessation of the pulsations of the heart, the usual cardiac sounds also cease. At the same time, their cessation furnishes a proof that respiration has ceased, and that the functions of the nervous system are not merely suspended, but destroyed (' Annales d'Hygiene,' 1848, 2, 78.) In reference to Respiration, the alternate motions of the chest and abdomen serve better as a means of diagnosis, and are more readily observed, than the motions of the chest alone. In the absence of a stethoscope, an opinion may


[69/1290 b21964944_0069.jp2]

CESSATION OF RESPIRATION. COOLING OP THE BODY. be formed from an external view of the body by the following arrangement. An even piece of looking-glass, plate glas.s, or a basin of water or of mercury, may be placed upon the front of the chest, and the image of some object allowed to be reflected from a window, or other strong soui-ce of light. The slightest motion in the reflecting surface will be indicated by an alteration in the image of the object reflected. A well-informed practitioner can, how- ever, generally determine the question without resorting to experiments of this description. The entire cessation of breathing, in the opinion of the late Sir B. Brodie, should be regarded alone, as a decisive test of the extinction of life. The movements of respiration cannot be overlooked by any one who does not choose to overlook them, and the heart never continues to act for more than four or five minutes after respiration has ceased. This organ has been properly described to be the jrmiiiim vivens, and the ■ultimum vioriens, the first to live and the last to die. The proofs of its continued action, however, are less obvious to the unskilled observer, than the movements of the chest; hence the visible cesstition of these movements for a period of five minutes, furnishes a certain proof that the person is really dead. But the skilled observer wotild apply the test of auscultation, and before giving an opinion would satisfy himself of the permanent cessation of the heart's action. It is impossible to admit that the heart can remain for even half an hour in a state of inaction in a human being, and then spontaneously recover its activity. 2. Coldness of the Body.—One of the most striking characteristics of life is the power which the body has, of retaining a temperature far above that of the medium in Avhich it is ordinarily placed. Notwithstanding that the body is constantly subjected to the same laws of cooling as all other heated solids, i. e. by radiation, conduction, and convection, the supply of heat internally, is so constant and uniform, as to counterbalance exactly the loss which is experienced. Some physiologists consider that animal heat depends entirely on the chemical changes produced by respiration ; but it is probable that the nervous system plays an important part in its production. ('Edinburgh Medical Journal,' vol. 58, p. 249.) When, therefore, life is extinguished, the body will gradually lose the heat which it possessed at the moment of death, just like so much inert organic matter artificially raised to the same temperature. There is considerable discrepancy among physiologists, concg.-ning the natural temperature of the limng body. The average temperature of the interior of the body in health, varies from 98° to 100°. It is liable to be in- creased in some diseases, and to be diminished in others. In one case of typhoid fever, M. Piorry states that he found the blood to have a temperature of 113°; and the temperature of the uterus during parturition, is said to have been found still higher. The time usually assigned for the cooling of the dead human body to the temperature of the air, is from fifteen to twenty hours, but it varies according to the condition of the body at the time of death, the mode of death, and the circumstances under Avhich it has been placed. From January to June 1863, Dr. Wilks and I collected observations on the cooling of the dead body in one hundred cases, at Giiy's Hospital. The age, the cause of death, and the circumstances under which the bodies were exposed, were at the same time noted. The reader will find the details of these cases in a table publi-shed in the ' Guy's Hospital Reports' for October 1863, p. 184. A sum- ■ mary of the observations of temperature recorded in this table, leads to the following conclusions. If the periods of time be divided, fii-st, into those which are included between two and three hours; secondly, between four and


[70/1290 b21964944_0070.jp2]

6 SIGNS OF DEATH. COOLING OF THE BODY. five hours; thirdly, between six and eight hours; and fourthly, twelve hours, including one or two cases extending to foui'teeu hours, the results were as follows: First period, Second period, Third period, Poiirth period, 2 to 3 liour.s to O llUUIo \l lAJ Q IIXJ LLi. o 12 hours Number of observations . 76 49 29 35 Maximum femperaliire of the body 94° 86° 80° 79° Minimum temperature of the body 60° 62° 60° 56° Average temperature 77° 74° 70° 69° The temperature was tested by simply placing the exposed bulb of a thermometer on the skin of the abdomen. It should be remarked, however, that as the observations could not be commenced until the bodies were brought to the dead-hoiise, and a variable interval elapsed, during which they remained in the ward, these temperatures are lower than they would be at the respective periods, after death; as the body Avould necessarily cool to some extent before the first observation could be made. They, nevertheless, show that a dead body cools slowly and progressively, and that the trunk generally retains a well-marked warmth for ten or twelve hours after death. If the circumstances under which a body is exposed are favourable to the loss of heat, it may be found cold in eight or nine hours after death. In tlie case of Millie, for the manslaughter of whom a man named Bolam Avas tried and convicted some years since, the body, although clothed, is reported to have been found cold about nine hours after death. It is customary to judge of the degree of coldness by the sense of touch; but the dead human skin is a good conductor of heat, and thus the surface may appear cold to a moderately warm hand. The condition of the hand itself may lead to an erroneous impression. If the two hands are of different temperatures, a recently dead body may appear cold to one and Avarm to the other. Another fact should also be borne in mind, that in the chest and abdomen, the viscera may retain a well-mai-ked warmth when the surface of the skin is actually cool or cold. Among the cases observed by Dr. Wilks and myself at Guy's Hospital in 1863, it was remarked that in several a high temperature was retained by the viscera for a long period after death. In two instances a thermometer indicated in the viscera a temperature of 76° in one in- stance seventeen, and in the other eighteen, hours after death,—the temperature of the air being comparatively low (49=), and the surfece of the body cool. In a third instance, ten hours after death, while the surface of the abdomen had a temperature of 65°, the interior was 85° (' Guy's Hospital Reports,' October 1863, p. 193). In all observations on the temperature of the dead body, a thermometer should, if possible, be employed. This may be applied for the exterior, either to the skin of the abdomen or to the armpits, and for determining the temperatttre of the interior, the bulb may be introduced mto the mouth, throat, or rectum. When death has taken place suddenly, from accident, apoplexy or acute disease, a body has been observed to retain its heat for a lon'cr period It IS stated, by Nysten, that the bodies of persons Avho have died from asphyxia by hanging, or suffocation, or from the inhalation of carbonic acid gas, do not cool, cceteris paribus, until from twenty-four to forty-eio-ht hours after death ; and that sometimes even three days have elapsed before


[71/1290 b21964944_0071.jp2]

ALLEGED EFFECTS OF ILEMOKEHAGE. i the body has become completely cold. Too much importance must not be attached to this statement, since in some cases of iatal asphyxia, the body has been observed to cool just as rapidly as in death from other causes. According to Dr. B. W. Richardson, a loss of blood, as in cases of death from hamiorrhage, whether the blood is effused externally or internally, or even temporarily withdrawn from the heart, as in syncope, is a cause of" the rapid cooling of the body. He states that ' the decline of the temperature in these cases is so great, that the external surface of the body may actually run down to that of the air without death.' (' Medical Critic,' January I860, p. 31.) The sudden cold of collapse observed on the surface of a living body, is here confounded Avith the slow and progressive cooling of a dead body. The cases which have been adduced in support of this view are exceptional instances of disease, and have no practical bearing on the question at issue— namely, the cooling of the body after the sudden death of healthy persons from wounds. Hence the conclusion drawn from them, ' if the body is left dead from direct and absolute loss of blood, cooling to the temperature of the surrounding medium is completed, in regard to the external surface, in two hours,' may lead to a serious error, and implicate an innocent person in a charge of murder. An opportunity of testing the accuracy of this statement presented itself at Guy's Hospital in February 1863. A healthy man, cet. forty-seven, died suddenly from haemorrhage. A ligature had been placed on the axillary artery in consequence of an accident: this gave way, and about four pounds of blood were lost. Four hours after death I saw the body of the deceased, and found the shoulders, chest, and abdomen qiiite warm. The skin of the abdomen had a temperature of 84°; eight hours after death the temperature was 80°, and the arms and legs were not rigid. The conditions under which this body was exposed, were favourable to rapid cooling : it was placed in a shell Avith a shirt loosely over it, and the temperature of the dead-house Avas 38°. The alleged effect of loss of blood in accelerating the cooling of the human body Avhen death has occurred suddenly from haemorrhage, has therefore no foundation in fact. The only physical difference which it Avould be likely to create, Avould be by simply reducing the amount of fluids in the body to undergo the cooling process. In the above well-marked case, the loss of four pounds made no appreciable difference in the rate of cooling. It has been suggested that coldness of the body as a result of disease, avIiether arising from malignant cholera, phthisis, or other chronic disease, or from death during the stage of collapse in poisoning, might create difficulty in reference to an opinion respecting the date of death. It is stated that the bodies of persons who have died of these diseases, have been found quite cold on the surface Avithin four or Jive hours ; at least, as cold as the bodies of healthy persons after the lapse of fifteen or tAventy hours. In such cases, coldness of the body is commonly manifested before dissolution, in those parts Avhich are the most exposed, as in the extremities of the hands and feet, the nose and ears. Like all other diagnostic signs, when taken alone, coldness of the surface is open to this objection; but the obvious cause of death, and the emaciated state of the body, as Avell as the facts connected Avith the occurrence and disappearance of ri"-idity, even supposing that no history of the case could be obtained, Avould be sufficient to remove any doubt. The objection is of a speculative kind, and no instance has been adduced in Avhich these morbid states have led to an erroneous medical opinion. The physical circumstances Avhich influence the cooling of a dead body are precisely those Avhicli influence the cooling of all heated inert substances. 1. The medium in Avhich it is immersed. A body will cool more rapidly in Avater than in air—a fact which may be important in a question of survivor-


[72/1290 b21964944_0072.jp2]

RATE OF COOLING IN THE DEAD BODY. 8 ship in drowning; and it will cool more rapidly in the open air than in a dwelling,—on the floor than in bed, or under exposure to a current of air than in a warm, tranquil atmosphere. It will cool more rapidly in a large apart- ment than in one which is small. The dead human body cools, first, by radiation ; secondly, by conduction ; thirdly, if naked and exposed, by convec- tion : consequently, its own mass, as well as the nature of the materials with Avhich it is in contact, must modify the results. The body of an adult, ccetejns 2Kiribus, cools more slowly than that of a child, or of an old person ; and that of a fat or corpulent person cools with less rapidity than one which is lean and emaciated. Again, when the dead human body is placed on good conducting substances, or is exposed to the open air in a naked state, the cooling process will be hastened. If, on the contrary, it is much covered with badly conducting materials, as cloth, flannel, or cotton, and is allowed to remain on a bed, it will require more than the usual period of time to become cold. The dead body, like so much inert matter, continues to cool until it reaches the temperature of the medium (air or water) to which it is exposed. As the soft solids are not good conductors of heat, the inner parts of the body are much longer than the surface in acquiring the temperature of the surrounding air; and, for the same reason, when once cooled, it is long before they reach the temperature of the air, supposing this to have risen. Thus, if a dead body is cooled to 60°, and the air in the room suddenly increases in tempera- ture to 80°, the viscera may be found to remain for some time at 60°. The dead body is not, therefore, like a minimum thermometer in marking a low tempei-ature, but, like all dead flesh, its temperature rises and falls with the thermometer, although more slowly than other solids possessing better con- ducting powers. Mere coldness of the body is not incompatible with a continuance of life ; for many morbid causes may modify, or even altogether suspend the produc- tion of heat in the living subject. Thus, in syncope or hysteria, it is not unusual to meet with extreme coldness of the skin; but this differs from the coldness of death, in taking place over the whole body suddenlj/, and in even preceding the state of apparent lifelessness. It does not depend merely, as in death, on the sIoav and gradual loss of heat, because it is perceptible even when the body is placed in conditions under which a heated substance would not become cold. Besides, the interior of the body at the rectum or throat will be found to have a higher temperature than the skin of the chest or abdomen. Let us take the opposite condition—Can the warmth of the human body be retained in its normal state for any length of time after death ? We might suppose, a 2'>riori, that this question should be at once answered in the negative; but there are numerous authentic observations which show that heat may be sometimes long retained by the dead body, both on the surface as well as in the cavities; and it has been noticed, in certain fatal diseases that the temperature has actually risen in the body after death. This excep- tional retention of heat has given rise to the erroneous suspicion that the person was still living, as in the following case, a report of which appeared in the ' Lancet' some years since :— A servant girl, who had retired to bed in apparently perfect health, Avas found on the following morning, as it was supposed, dead. A surgeon who was called in pronounced her to be certainly dead, and stated that she had pro- bably been dead for some hours. A coroner's inquest was summoned for four o'clock of the same day, to inquire into the cause of death; and directions were given that a post-mortem inspection of the body should be made in the meantime. The reporter of the case Avas requested to give his assistance. Accompanied by the surgeon who had been consulted, he Avcnt to the house about two o'clock, for the purpose of making an inspection. The deceased


[73/1290 b21964944_0073.jp2]

9 rRODUCTION OF HEAT AFTER DEATH. was found lying on the bed, in an easy posture, on her left side, her body forming somewhat of a semicircle. The countenance was pallid, but so per- fectly placid and composed, as to give to her the appearance of being in a deep sleep. The heat of the body, although she must have been dead eiglit or ten hours, was not in the least diminished. The room was carellilly searched, but nothing in the shape of poison, nor any other means of self- destruction, could be discovered: every article of apparel lay aroimd, as it might be supposed to have been left, by a person going to bed in perfect health as usual. The heat of the body not diminishing, a vein was opened, and various stimuli applied, but without producing any sign of resuscitation. Ivespiration and circidation had ceased ; no artery could be felt pulsating in any part. Two hours had now elapsed since their arrival, and the parties still hesitated to perform the inspection, Avhen a message was sent to them, stating that the jury were waiting for their evidence. The inspection Avas then commenced ; but in moving the body for the purpose, the warmth and pliancy of the limbs were such as to suggest to the examiners that they were inspecting a living subject! The internal cavities were so Avarm that a copious steam issued from them Avhen they were laid open. All the viscera were healthy, there were no signs of disease ;—nothing appeared to account for death, and from what they saw, the inspectors regretted that they had not postponed the examination until the signs of death had been more completely manifested ! For obvious reasons, the name of the place where this extraor- dinary case occurred, and the name of the reporter, were suppressed. It is probable that a high temperature Avas retained by this body for a much longer period than usual after death. There Avere, hoAvcA^er, tAvo physical causes in operation, the influence of Avhich does not seem to have been suffi- ciently appreciated. The girl died suddenly Avhile in a state of perfect health and vigour; and until the time of inspection, the body appears to have remained in bed closely covered by badly-conducting materials; i. e. the bed- clothes. The temperature of the room in Avhich the body Avas found, is not stated; but as the month was October, it was probably not Ioav. The tem- peratiu-e of the surface or of the internal organs, Avas not measured by a thermometer. Although there can be no doubt that this girl Avas really dead, yet, as a rule, no medical man is justified in making an inspection of a body until after the signs of death (coldness and rigidity) have been clearly mani- fested. Eespiration and circulation had ceased, and no pulsation could be felt in the heart or arteries; the body had been in this state for at least eight liours; hence it is evident that this Avas not a case of apparent death. The examiners Avere simply deceived by an unusual retention of heat in the viscera (see ante, page 6). Doubts Avere entertained for several days respecting the death of the Avell-knoAvn Professor DiefFenbach, of Berlin. The unusual retention of heat, and the delay of the putrefactive process, led to the supposition that he AA'as only in a state of apparent death. It can .scarcely be imagined that the production of heat should continue in a really dead body; and yet certain Hicts connected Avith the malignant cholera, yellow fever, and other diseases, appear to establish the possibility of this. In some cases of death from malignant cholera, Avhen epidemic in this country, in 1832-3, the body, Avhich had become moderately cold, Avas observed suddenly to resume its Avarmth, so that the temperature is stated to have i-isen some time after death as high as 87°, althoiigh circulation and respiration had entirely ceased. This singular phenomenon, like numerous others connected Avith that disease, has received no adequate explanation. The death of the persons may have been only apparent and not real; and possibly, a sudden reaction and distribution of blood through the capillary system, may have given rise to the effect observed. The fact of its occur-


[74/1290 b21964944_0074.jp2]

rOST-MORTEM CALOIUCITY. 10 rence must be taken as positive evidence of some latent vital power or chemical force still lingering about the circulating system ; for in real death, the animal body, when it has once become cold, is no more capable of spon- taneously generating heat within itself, than any of tlie inert and lifeless solids by which it is surrounded. In a case of death from Asiatic cholera, Mr. Kumsey observed that half an hour after the complete cessation of respiration and circulation, the muscles of the arms underwent spontaneously various motions of contraction and relaxation, continuing for upwards of an hour, and that althougli previously cold, they then became evidently warmer. The restoration of warmth after the laody has become cold in such cases, can only be explained by supposing that there still remains about it some lingering trace of vital action; although this may not be indicated by the presence of the ordinary signs of active life. The facts connected with the production of heat in the dead body, have not received much attention from physiologists. Dr. John Davy met with some extraordinary high temperatures in the dead body. In a case of rheumatism, after the viscera had been exposed for nearly ten minutes, the mercury of a thermometer, placed under the left ventricle, rose to 113°, and Avhen in contact with the lobulus Spigelii of the liver to 112°. In a second subject, examined six hours after death, the thermometer under the left ventricle indicated a temperature of 108°, and when in contact with the lobulus Spigelii 107°. In these cases, the patients were ill but a short time, and died suddenly; and the temperatm-e of the apartment in which the observations were made, was 86°. This increase of temperature after death has been referred to putrefxction ; but Dr. Dowler has shown that it takes place soon after death, and before rigidity sets in. Some of the cases reported by Dr. Wilks and myself also show that it may take place indepen- dently of putrelaction. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.' Oct. 18G3, cases 4, 26, 30, p. 184.) Dr. Dowler has called this condition post-mortem caloricity; he has noticed it as a common occurrence, in a warm climate, in the bodies of persons who have died from yellow fever. The heat of the body, according to him, con- tinues to increase for several hours after death; and in one case, after six hours, he found the arm-pit to have a temperature of 100°, and the abdomen, of 103°. In another, the temperature of the arm-pit during life being 100°, it was found that in three hours after death, the temperature of this part had risen to 104° ; in a third case, a similar increase was observed in thirty minutes. The highest post-mortem temperatures wei'e observed in the thighs. Tims in a case in which the arm-pit had, during life, a temperature of 104°; in ten minutes after death it indicated a temperature of 109°, and in fifteen minutes after death, the thigh gave a temperature of 113°. When the maxi- mum, which is variable in different bodies, has been attained, the body gradually undergoes the cooling process observed after death, and according to Dr. Dowler, this generally commences Avith the head. (' Phil. Med. Exa- miner,' Oct. and Nov. 1845, pp. 625 and 359.) In death from malignant cholera, he found that the dead body reached its maximum temperature of 109° in about an hour and a half. Dr. Hensley has published, in the same journal, a series of cases in old and young persons, who had died from diffe- i-ent causes; these do not show a similar increase of heat, but they prove that after thirty hours, a dead body may retain a temperature two or three de"-rces above that of the room (March 1846, p. 151). These observations may serve to explain facts similar to those observed in the case of supposed premature inspection just now related, for they show that in some exceptional instances a really dead body may retain for many hours a temperature as hWh or higher, than that Avhich is usually found in the living. ' Dr. Dowler considers that the gradual loss of heat in the interior of the


[75/1290 b21964944_0075.jp2]

CADAVEKIC RIGIDITY IN THE BODY. body, as dctennineJ by a tliermoineter, lurnislies the best test to establish the reality of death. The living body maintains a uniform temperature, inde- pendently of that of the surrounding medium; but a dead body, like other inert matter, is governed in its temperature by purely physical conditions, * heating and being heated, receiving and radiating caloric. This is not the result of speculation, but of prolonged and varied experimental research.' (' Phil. Med. Examiner,' Oct. 1850, p. 606.) It may be observed, however, that in temperate climates, the signs of death are sufficiently well marked by the progressive cooling and rigidity of the body, before the application of the thermometrical test to the interior could be made; hence, although it would furnish information that death had certainly taken place, a medical examiner could come to a safe conclusion without it. The occasional exist- ence of post-mortem caloricity offers no objection to this conclusion, since cooling sooner or later follows this condition, as a result of ordinary physical CJiuses. The coldness of the living body in cholera, congelation, hysteria, &c., is a physiological condition, and not the result of physical cooling. If death fcikes place, the coldness may continue, or the body may again become warm. In either case it passes ultimately, by physical cooling, to the temperature of the surrounding medium. 3. Cadaveric IvIgidity. Rigou Mortis. — In fi-om five to six hours after death and generally while the body is in the act of cooling, the muscles of the limbs are obserred to become hard and contracted, the joints stiff, and the body firm and unyielding. This peculiar condition is known under the name of cadaveric rigidity. The first effect of death from any cause is in most cases a general relaxation of the whole of the muscular system. The lower jaw drops, the eyelids lose their tension, the limbs arc soft and flabby, and the joints are quite fiexible. The muscular tissue may be considered as passing through three stages in a dead body. 1. It is, as above mentioned, flaccid but contractile, although, as it Avill be seen hereafter, muscles contracted by living force in the act of dying, do not necessiirily become relaxed in death; 2. It becomes rigid and incapable of contraction; and 3. It is once more relaxed, and does not regain its power of contractility. The body now passes into the incipient stage of putrefaction. The first stage defines the duration of muscular irritabihty ; the second stage,that of cadaveric rigidity; and the third, that of the commencement of chemical change or putrefaction. Its Seat. — Experiment shows that the seat of this phenomenon is in tlie muscular system, for the rigidity disappears immediately on the removal or division of the muscles. According to the experiments of Beclard and others, the rigid condition of the muscles is wholly independent of the integrity of the nervous system : for a division of the nerves leading to the particular muscles, or even the entire removal of the brain, has not been found to prevent it, or to retard its occurrence. It has also been observed, that when death has taken place from paralysis, hemiplegia, or apoplexy, the rigidity has been as strongly manifested by the muscles of the paralytic or hemiplegic, as by those on the healthy side, provided they are well nourished and retain some irrita- bility. The muscles of shattered limbs in death from comminuted fractures, do not take on this condition. It is probable that the rigidity is due to a vital action in the muscular fibre ; and possibly, as John Hunter imagined, it may be the last effect of the vital force on the muscular system. According to Kussmaul the living metamorphosis of the muscle has ceased ; the muscle be- coming rigid is a dying,—the perfectly rigid, is a dead muscle. Rigidity is in general observed to take place simultaneously Avith tlie coagulation of the blood throughout the body. Some have considered it to depend upon this: but not to mention that the alleged cause appears to be wholly inadequate to the


[76/1290 b21964944_0076.jp2]

12 SEAT OF RIGIDITY. TIME OF OCCURRENCE. effect produced, the rigidity sometimes occiirs while the body is warm and the blood fluid, therefore this cannot be the true explanation : moreover it closely resembles the rigidity ofsynctpe and asphyxia, which can have no reference to the coagulation of the blood. M. Brown Soquavd has found by experiments on rabbits that if a current of arterial blood is re-established through muscles in Avhich cadaveric rigidity lias already begun to show itself, they cease to be rigid, and recover their irritability. lie even succeeded in removing the cadaveric rigidity from the muscles of the decapitated body of a criminal, thirteen hours after execution and two hours after llie supervention of rigidity, by the injection of defibri- nated human blood. The muscles lost their rigidity, and continued to contract on irritation for several hours. (' Gaz. Med. de Paris,' Nos. 24 and 27 ; and ' Amer. Journ. Med. Sci. Jan.' 1852, p. 221.) These facts appear to show that the muscles on becoming rigid, still possess a vital power. Rigidity is undoubtedly referable to the sj^ontaneous contraction or rather stiffening of the muscles; until it appears, these organs are susceptible of galvanic and mechanical stimuli, but after it has ceased, this irritability of the muscular fibre is entirely lost. The power with which these organs contract in the rigid state, is far less than that observed, when they are subjected to the influence of volition in the living body. The contractile force is not so great as to induce any apparent alteration in the position of the parts to which the tendinous extremities of the muscles are attached ;—so that there is no dis- placement, nor is any force of a counterbalancing nature, manifested between flexors and extensors. It is asserted that the flexor muscles are usually more contracted than the extensors, so that the limbs and trunk, as Avell as the fingers, if left undisturbed in the dead body, have a tendency to assume a state of flexion. As a general rule, however, the position in which the muscles may be, at the time of death, is that which they retain during the state of rigidity, whether the body be lying, sitting, or standing, and whether the limbs be in a state of flexion or extension. When the rigid state is strongly manifested, the muscles assume a jjrominence, as under violent contraction in the living body. The time at which rigidity occurs after deatli, as well as its duration, is affected by various circumstances. It generally commences within Jive or six hours, and lasts from sixteen to twenty-four hours. Sommer assigns the time at Avhich it occurs, after the cessation of respiration, as not later than seven hours. Nysten, who closely investigated this subject, considered that rigidity never made its appearance in the muscles, imtil the body had entirely lost its animal heat; but some of his own observations tend to show that this state- ment is not correct. Cases every noAv and then present themselves, in Avhich after death, the limbs become rigid while they are yet warm ; and it is the same with the trunk. Ollivier observed, in cases of death from malignant cholera, that cadaveric rigidity occiu-red while the body was yet waj-m. He has also seen a rigid condition of the muscles in well-developed bodies, Avhich were inspected in from six to eight hours after death. (' Ann. d'Hyg.' 1833, 1, 233.) M, Brown Sequard mentions the case of a man who died in one of the Parisian hospitals in 1849, in whose body cadaveric rigidity appeared three minutes after he had ceased to breathe, and while the heart Avas still beating tAventy times in a minute, Avhile the man was still alive, if life is considered to persist so long as the heart beats ! These beatings ceased only three minutes and a lialf after cadaveric rigidity had shoAvn itself every Avhere. A (luarter of an hour afterwards, there was no trace of cadaveric rigidity, and in less than an hour after death, signs of putrefiiction had appeared in the limbs. This man died of exhaustion after prolonged typhoid fever. (' Savory on Life and Death '


[77/1290 b21964944_0077.jp2]

RIGIDITY BEFORE THE COOLING OF THE BODY. 18 p. 19G.) According to Kiissmau], when the muscular system is poAverfully devt'loped and death is sudden, rigidity may not occur for sixteen or seventec>n hours, and the shortest period within Avhicli it may occur and pass off in such cases, is about ten hours after deatli ; but under certain circumstances it may continue for fourteen days or even longer. In a case in which I was con- sulted, a stout muscular man died suddenly from an attack of apoplexy. His body was exhumed and examined three weeks after death in the month ol" Januaiy. It was in a good state of preservation, and the limbs were so rigid that it required a great degree of force to bend them. No doubt in this case the cold favoured the continuance of rigidity. The following case related by Dr. Chowne, shows the rapid access of cada- veric rigidity in a child, as well as its occurrence in a dead body before the entire loss of animal heat. This gentleman was called to a labour, and when he an-ived, the child had been born about three quarters of an hour, and the midwife was then engaged in dressing it. One arm was a little raised and the hands were partly closed—these circumstances giving it the appearance of being a living child. He found, however, that it had actiially been still- born, and that it had been part of the time in a warm bath. The other limbs were also stiff in about the same degree. The stiffness Avas unequivocal, there was no elasticity, as if it Avas the result of spasmodic muscular contrac- tion :—a joint being flexed, it remained flexed. The midwife particularly observed the stiffness Avhile the child was in the warm bath. The mother said the child moved, very perceptibly to herself, not long before its birth. Whether the skin was hot or cold is not stated, but the bod}^ of a child cools very quickly. It is probable, from the midwife's statement, that the rigidity came on immediately or very soon after death. Sommer placed the bodies of two infants, which had died asphyxiated, in tepid baths at from 90° to 99° immediately after birth, and left them there. In between three and four hours rigidity was developed, and had attained its height in six hours. In eleven hours the rigidity of the lower jaw had disappeared. I observed in a cat which had died from disease, that the body and limbs became perfectly rigid about an hour after death, while warmth was still very great throughout. The bodies of birds generally beconie rigid before they cool. I have also remarked, in animals poisoned by prussic acid, where con- vulsions ensued, that they died in violent muscular spasm, with the limbs and tail perfectly rigid while the body was warm. This last condition, how- ever, corresponds rather to what has been called cadaveric spasm than cadaveric rigidity. The difference between these two states will be a subject for after-consideration. Cceteris paribus^ rigidity is always more strongly manifested and continues for a longer period, in those bodies in which the muscular system is healthy and fully developed. It has been observed, that the time at which it appears after death in muscular subjects, is longer than in other cases, so that it may not supervene for twelve or fourteen hours, and it may last for twenty-four or thirty-six hours. Rigidity is said to be slow in manifesting itself, in death from" htemorrhage, irritant poisoning, apoplexy, wounds of the heart, decapita- tion, as also in all cases of asphyxia, especially in death fi'om hanging, or from the action of carbonic acid. In a remarkable case of suicide from a fatal wound in the throat, observed by Dr. Handyside, the rigidity of the muscular system commenced while the body was yet warm, and was complete in one hour and a half aiter death. This early occurrence of rigidity cannot be referred to any influence produced on the muscular system by loss of blood. In a case of death from haemorrhage, in whicli four pounds of blood were suddenly lost from the axillary artery, it was observed that eight hours after death, the arms and legs were pliant; and it was not until twelve liours


[78/1290 b21964944_0078.jp2]

CADAVERIC RIGIDITY. MODIFYING CONDITIONS. 14 after death, when the body was becoming cold, that rigidity manifested itself. Death by ha;morrhagc, therefore, does not accelerate this condition ; it appears to have no more influence upon the period of its occurrence, than it has upon the cooling of the body (see page 7). So with regard to irritant poisoning in an acute form; no difference was observed in reference to the rate of cooling or the commencement of rigidity in a well-marked case of death from arsenic in eleven hours. In a case of suffocation by chai'coal vapour, Nysten observed that rigidity did not make its appearance until sixteen hours after death, and it is stated to have lasted for the long period of seven days. In other instances of suffocation, this protraction of cadaveric rigidity has not been noticed. In these cases, the slow access of this state depends less on the mode of death than on the irritability of the muscles at the time of death. This is ahvays great Avhen the nutrition of the muscles is perfect, a condition Avhich exists in cases of violent death, as from decapitation, sudden haimorrhage, or some form of asphyxia. Dr. Symonds has seen a body in a state of rigidity eight days after death by hanging. Ny-sten found that there was muscular irritability in the body of a decapitated man, twenty-six hours after the head had been severed from the body; and Brown Sequard states as the general result of his experience, that in the bodies of healthy persons decapitated or asphyxiated, cadaveric rigidity did not appear sooner than ten or twelve hours after death, and that it lasted more than a week even when the weather was warm. He has found in the muscles of the limbs of two de- capitated men, some degree of irritability thirteen and fourteen hours after death. Atmospheric changes appear to modify considerably the duration of this state. Dry and cold air will cause it to persist for a long time ; and thus it is, that during the winter season, especially in a frost, it is slow in disap- pearing ;—its mean duration being then from twenty-four to thirty-six hours. If the air is warm and saturated with humidity, it soon ceases. Temperature appears therefore chiefly to affect its duration and intensity. Sommer foimd tliat, other things being equal, bodies became rigid as quickly in an atmosphere of fi:om 59° to 63° as in one from 77° to 81°; but that the bodies of strong persons continued rigid for eight or ten days at a temperature of from 30° to 45°, while it totally disappeared in from four to six days when they were exposed to a temperature of from 65° to 86°. Bodies siuik in cold water soon pass into this state, and retain their rigidity for a long time. Water is a better conductor of heat than air, and tends to retard piitrefaction. The con- tracted state of the skin known as cutis anseinna is sometimes observed in a recently-drowned body. According to Nysten cadaveric rigidity first appears in the muscles of the trunk and neck; it then takes place in the muscles of the upper extremities and lastly in those of the lower. In regard to its disappearance, the muscles of the lower extremities Avill often be found rigid, while those of the trunk and upper extremities are again in a state of relaxation. It appears later and lasts longer in the lower extremities, than in other parts of the body. If Nysten's theory were true, that rigidity depended exclusively on the mere loss of heat, it should appear first in the lower extremities, and last in the ti-unk. His own observations, therefore, respecting the order of its disappear- ance are against his theory. Later observers have to some extent corroborated Nysten's statements regarding the commencement and diffusion of rigidity. Thus it begins almost always in the neck and lower jaw. Sommer found only one exception to this rule in examining two hundred dead bodies. From the neck it passes in two directions: upwards to the muscles of the face, and downwards to the muscles of the upper extremities and trunk,—then attacking those of the


[79/1290 b21964944_0079.jp2]

15 RIGIDITY OF THE MUSCLES IN THE LIVING. lower extremities. In the particular limbs, it commonly proceeds from above downwards, and it generally passes off in the same order. It always sets in, increases, and decreases imperceptibly and gradually, in which respect it ditVers strikingly from the rigidity of muscles as a result of disease. (' Kliss- maul, Vierteljahrschrift fiir die praktische Ileillamde, 185G.' B. 2, s. G7. Sec also a translation by Dr. ]\Ioore, ' Dublin Quar. Jour. IMed. Sci.' 185C, vol. 22, p. 490.) It will now be necessary to consider whether a living body ever assumes a condition analogous to that of cadaveric rigidity. Tetanus, apoplexy, catalepsy, hysteria, .syncope, and asphyxia, have been stated to present symi)toms which might lead to doubt respecting the reality of death from this sign. There are, hoAvever, these striking differences. In rigidity from any of these diseases, the Avarmth of the body is commonly in great part preserved, if not on the sur- face, in the rectum and flexures of the joints. The rigidity of disease takes place simultaneously with the apparent suspension of life from the attack ; and lastly, the whole of the body becomes equally rigid at the same moment, owing to the existence of a universal muscular spasm. In oi-der to distin- guish this state of spasm in a really living member from the rigidity of death, it has been recommended to bend it forcibly ; if it be in a state of spasm fi-om disease (tetanus), it will return to its original position so soon as the bending force is removed; if it be in a state of cadaveric rigidity, the limb will not return to its position, but may be afterAvards moved in any direction. If rigidity Avas at the time fully developed, the muscle will not again become rigid ; if, however, rigidity Avas only commencing, then the limb Avill again resume its rigid condition, but sloAvly. (Sommer.) This is the main distinction between rigidity in a living and in a dead body. In real death, hoAvever, other unequivocal signs Avill be present. Rigidity takes place in the muscles of the countenance as Avell as in those of the body. It is important to bear this in mind, since identity may be mistaken Avhen a corpse is seen about this period. The expression of the countenance, as of anger, pain, or terror, at the moment of death, depends on the contraction of the facial muscles. Alter death these, like other voluntary muscles, undergo relaxation, and the face assumes a placid appearance; but as rigidity manifests itself, there is sometimes a remarkable change of expression. The face is pale or salloAv, the jaws are fixed, the corners of the mouth are drawn doAvnAvards, the temples sunk in, and the broAv contracted. Even those who may have known a person Avell during life, Avould scarcely recognize him at this tinie, were they to see the body in a strange locality. Dr. SnoAV was once called to see a young Avoman after she had been dead three days, Avhose face had suddenly become so suffused and red, that her friends doubted the reality of her death. Afler a time, hoAvever, the colour abated, and the commencement of putrefaction clearly proved that she Avas dead. ('Medical Critic,' January 1«G3, p. 26.) I have Avitnessed a similar appearance in a corpse; the cheeks acquired a florid red colour between the third and fourth day after death, Avhen rigidity had ceased. It is supposed that this colour is due to the action of the oxygen of tlie air on the blood forced into the capillaries by incipient decomposition. It is hardly necessary to observe that this appearance, coupled, as it is stated to have been in some cases, Avith a slight degree of Avarmth, could not give rise to any mistake about the date of death, since the rest of the body Avould be cold, and in death Avhich is really recent, the flice becomes cold before the skin of the chest and abdomen. Accordino- to Dr. Symonds, the kind of deatli ahvays has a great influence on the expression of the countenance. On fields of battle, the corpses of those who have died of stabs are easily distinguished by the countenance from tho.se Avho have Mien by gunshot. In the former, an extremely painful


[80/1290 b21964944_0080.jp2]

16 CADAVERIC RIGIDITY. STATE OF THE MUSCLES. impression must have been tivansmitted to the brain, whicli produced the usual change in the nerves and muscles of expression; in the latter, con- cussion Avas given to the whole system, paralysing, without any intermediate sensation, so that no expression remained more than that of the repose of the muscles. (' Cyc. Anat. and Physiol.,' Art. Death.) The involuntary muscles are subject to cadaveric rigidity as well as the vokmtary, and by reason of the more speedy loss oi' muscular iri'itability, it appears in them more rapidly. The ventricles of the heart commonly lose their irritability within an hour after death. They become rigid, and remain in that state for ten or twelve hours, sometimes for twenty-four or thirty-six hours, then again becoming relaxed or flaccid (Carpenter). Duval saw the heart of a criminal a quarter of an hour alter decapitation, beating with great distinctness. The left auricle in particular exhibited strong and regular action, forty-four times in a minute, and continued to do so for an hour. (' Prov. Med. Journ.,' September 1851.) At a certain period after death, the heart becomes rigid aijd firmly contracted. If examined at this time, it may appear to be in a state of sjoasm and to have its walls thickened, while the cavity of the left ventricle may be described as being much smaller than in the normal state. Mr. Paget has pointed out that this natural condition of the heart after death has led to pathological mistakes, the walls being described as thickened and the cavities being diminished in size, and the heart itself as being in a state of concentric hypertrophy from disease. On the other hand, the perfect relaxation of the heart which follows at a later period after death, has been mistaken for and described as a morbid flabbiness and flaccidity. Spasm and paralysis cannot be inferred to have existed when we discover these conditions of the heart in the dead body. The observations of M. Brown Sequard have furnished an explanation of many of the difliculties connected with the occurrence, duration, and disappearance of cadaveric rigidity. (' On the Relations between Muscular Irritability, Cadaveric Rigidity, and Putrefaction.' ' Proc. R.S.' May 1861, p. 204.) This physiologist agrees with Nysten and others that the greater the degi-ee of muscular irritability at the time of death, the later cadaveric rigidity sets in, and the longer it lasts; and the later also putrefaction appears, and the more slowly it progresses. Muller and Gierlichs had already shown that rigidity does not occur imtil the muscles have lost their irritability, or their power of contracting on the application of ordinary stimuli; that in frogs, in Avhich, as in other re])tiles, muscular irritability is very persistent, rigidity is often not established until three or four days after death'; that in birds, on the other hand, in which muscular irritability remains but a short time after death, rigidity ensues quickly. Fiirther, all circumstances which cause a speedy exhaustion of muscular irritability during life, induce an early occurrence of cadaveric rigidity, while those conditions by Avhich the ap- pearance of irritability is delayed, retard its access. (' Balv and Kirke's Physiology,' 1818, p. 9.) M. iBrown Sequard observed as a result of his experiments on animals, that when the temperature of the muscles was dimi- nished before death, their irritability lasted long after death ; cadaveric rigidity set in late, and lasted long; and putrefaction appeared late and proceeded slowly. Whatever exhausts muscular irritability, such as violent exercise or exertion accelerates rigidity in the dead, and, in an equal degree, putrefaction : this ap- plies to observations on man, as well as on animals. Rigidity takes place rapidly in the dead bodies of cattle that have been overdriven, or of animals that have been hunted to death. The bodies of soldiers killed in the early part of a battle become rigid slowly, while the bodies of those who are killed at the close, after many hours of violent muscular exertion, become rigid almost immediately. This may explain the singular flict recorded by military men.


[81/1290 b21964944_0081.jp2]

17 EXIIAUSTIOX OF MUSCULAR 1KRITA13ILIT7. tliat tlie bodies are sometimes foiiud on tlie field of battle stiflfened in the attitude of kneeling or sitting, with their weapons clenched firmly in their hands (piige 22). There has been no relaxation in death, but the muscles appear to have at once passed from a living contraction into a rigid condition. This also throws light upon a fact to be presently noticed (page 24), that suicides are sometimes found with weapons grasped in their hands, and their bodies stiffened in the attitudes in which they have died. It may he inferred in these cases that, from some cause operating during life, the muscular irritabi- lity was exhausted at the time of death. Hence the greatest differences are observed to exist in regard to cadaveric rigidity and putrefaction, in conse- quence of the variable degree of muscular irritability at the time of death. The effects of strychnia and other poisons which produce convulsions may be explained by reference to their action on the muscles. Rigidity has been observed to set in with great rapidity in animals destroyed by strychnia or veratria. Ktissmaul made a similar observation in reference to the action of coal-gas on the system. Brown Sequard noticed that when death was produced almost at once by these poisons, or by others having a similar mode of action, e. g. atropia, morphia, oxalic acid, and cyanide of mercury, there was hardly any effect observed on the time of access and duration of rigidity and putrefaction ; but when convulsions had existed for a long time before death, the influence was most remarkable. He poisoned three healthy dogs, as much alike as possible, with the acetate of strychnia. One of them had a dose of two grains, another of half a grain, and the third of one-fourth of a grain. The first dog died at once ; the second afler twelve minutes, during seven of which it had convulsions; and the third after twenty-one minutes, during eleven of which it suffered from convulsions. The following are the tabulated results in ]'eference to the duration of muscular irritability and of cadaveric rigidity, as well as of the occurrence of putrefaction :— Durat. of njusc. irrit. Curat, of cad. rigid. Putrefaction. 1st dog ... 8 hours . . . 19 or 20 days . . . slow 2nd dog . . . 2|- ,, ... 5 days . . . rapid 3rd dog ... in ... less than a day . . very rapid In other animals Avhich were killed by poisons causing convulsions, the more violent and frequent the convulsions were, the sooner cadaveric rigidity set in; and the shorter the time that it lasted, the sooner also did putrefaction appear, and tlie more rapid its progress. In reference to my own experiments, a rabbit died from the effects of half a grain of strychnia in twenty-three minutes; during the last eleven minutes it had several fits of convulsions, and died in one of these. In ten minutes after death, rigidity showed it.self in the hind legs, and rapidly spread throughout the body. The rigidity had decrea.sed in tw^o days, and had nearly disappeared in four days. (' Guy's llosp. Reports,' Oct 185fi, p. 112.) In the body of a .strongly-built woman, who died of hydro- phobia after violent convulsions, Brown Sequard found that cadaveric rigidity had set in within the first hour after death, and that it had ceased before the end of the tenth hour. Although, according to Nysten, the later the time at Avhich rigidity com- mences the longer it lasts, yet it does not necessarily follow that when it speedily supervenes afler death, it will rapidly disappear. There are many fiicts which show that when the muscles are strongly contracted at the time of death, they become rigid in this contracted state, and remain rigid for many hours, and even days. The rigidity produced as a result of poisoning by strychnia, may some- times continue for a very long period. Thus, in the case of J. P. Cook (Reg. V, Palmer, 1856), the body, when examined on the sixth day after deatli, was in a state of rigid .«pasm, and the members were found in a similar c


[82/1290 b21964944_0082.jp2]

18 EXHAUSTION OF MUSCULAR lERlTABILITY. state on the exhumation of the body two months afterwards. It is worthy of remark that Cook lived only twenty minutes after the symptoms first appeared. He suffered from a few convulsive fits, but not sufficient to exhaust the irrita- bility of the muscular system. These facts have an important bearing on cases of poisoning by strychnia and other spinal poisons. The state of the dead body will vary according to the rapidity of death, and the degree of exhaustion of muscular irritability at the time of death, as a result of the fits of convulsions produced by the poison. They also show that when, from whatever cause, muscular irri- tability at the time of death is slight, either in consequence of a bad state of nutrition or of exhaxistion from over-exertion, or from convulsions caused by disease or poison, cadaveric rigidity sets in and ceases soon, and putrefaction appears and progresses quickly. (Brown Setjuard, 'Proc. R.S.,' May 1861.) For a similar reason it takes place at an earlier period in the very young and the old, than in an adult at the prime of life. It has been long observed that the bodies of those who are emaciated, or who die from debilitating diseases, such as phthisis, typhus or typhoid fever, and malignant cholera, pass rapidly into a state of rigidity, which is commonly of short duration. Hence, owing to Avant of correct observation, it has been erroneously stated that cadaveric rigidity did not occur in such cases. In reference to deaths from malignant cholera. Brown Sequard observed, that cadaveric ligidity appeared late and lasted long in those patients who died qviickly, that is, before a prolonged alteration of nutrition, and that those muscles which had been attacked with violent and frequent cramps, became rigid very soon after death, and remained so only for a short time. M. Olli- vier found that the bodies of cholera patients were frequently rigid in from six to eight hours after death, while the muscles which were the seat of this rigidity Avei-e still Avarm, and on making an incision into them, the blood readily floAved out. A similar error has arisen respecting the bodies of per- sons killed by lightning. John Hunter thought that cadaveric rigidity did not occur in this mode of violent death ; but the late Sir B. Brodie found that the body of an animal killed by electricity became, as usual, rigid after death. In an accident which occurred in France, in August 1846, a group of labourers Avas struck by the electric fluid : four Avere killed on the spot, and five or six severely Avounded. It Avas remarked that the ])erson Avhose body bore the most extensive marks of injury had Avoi-n a goat-skin. There Avere several lacerations about this body, and in three hours after death it became perfectly rigid. ('Med. Gaz.,' vol. 38, p. 351.) In a case of death from lightning, communicated to the ' Medical Gazette' by Dr. F. J, BroAvn, rigidity Avas strongly marked in the limbs about tAventy-eight hours after death (vol. 47, p. 844). In May 1854, dui-ing a storm, a man was struck by the electric fluid. He made a short exclamation, and immediately expired. It was observed in this case that the body became rigid after death. Facts are noAv sufficiently numerous to enable us to say that the old opinion of the non-occurrence of rigidity in the bodies of persons killed by lightning; is unfounded. Dr. Bagot, of Ballingarry, has informed me that, in a case Avhich i he examined in the summer of 1855, the body of a man, a3t. 28, Avho had I been killed by lightning, Avas as rigid tAventy-eight hours after death as iff death had taken place from any other cause. The researches of BroAvni Sequard afford a satisfactory explanation of the differences among pliysiolo- - gists upon this question. In some instances, no doubt, cadaveric rigidity hass set in, and has been of such short duration, that it has not been possible tO) ascertain its existence. Death by lightning may be the result 1st, of syncope by fright, or m consequence of a direct or reflex influence of lightning on the par vagum ; 2ndly, of htemorrhage or bleeding in or around the brain the^


[83/1290 b21964944_0083.jp2]

19 STATE OF THE HANDS AFTER DEATH. lungs, or pericardium; and 3rdly, of concussion, or some other clmnge produced by the electric liuid on the brain and nervous system. When death by light- ning is due to any one of these causes, cadaveric rigidity may appear and run through its course rapidly, as in some other cases of sudden death. But lightning may destroy life like a powerful galvanic shock, by producing such a violent convulsion of every muscle in the body that muscular irritability ceases almost at once. The rigidity in this case may be of such short dura- tion as entirely to escape notice. Allowing for the difference in the relative power of lightning and galvanism, the greater effect of the former may reduce the duration of muscular irritability to the fraction of a second, and that of cadaveric rigidity in a corresponding degree, so tliat no trace of it may remain even a few minutes after death (op. cit., p. 209). Eanke has made the curious observation, that there is a difference in the conducting power of living and dead muscle, in reference to electricity. Contrary to that which might have been anticipated, he found that dead muscle was a much better conductor than living muscle; and he traced this increase in conducting power to the presence of certain products of decomposition which do not appear until after death. Jt has been observed, as a general rule, that cadaveric rigidity does not affect the relative position of the parts to which the muscles are attached ; but a peculiar condition of the hands of the dead, observed by M. Villerme, would tend to show that in dying, the fingers assume a certain position by virtue of the contraction of the flexor muscles connected with them; although it is not quite established, whether this conti-acted state of the fingers takes place at the same moment with the commencing rigidity of the body, or whether it is not an immediate consequence of dissolution. M. Villerme has remarked, that in a dead body, the thumbs are always bent iuAvards towards the palms of the hands, the apex of the thumb being opposite the base of the little finger ; and the thumb itself being covered by the four fingers of the hand. M. Villerme found this condition in many dead bodies which had not been dis- turbed. Devergie sui)poses that this position of the thumbs depends on a convulsive action of the fingers at the last moment of life; and as death may take place without any convulsive action, the appearance may be in some instances wanting. This sign of death, if it can be so called, is of but little importance; it will, however, be found in a large number of cases where there has been no interference with the hands. (' Ann. d'Hyg.' 1830, 2, 420.) There is another condition of the hand in the dead which calls for notice. If the hand of a living person is held before a strong light, it will be found to be translucent, and of a deep red colour from the blood circulating through it. The hand of a really dead person thus examined is stated to be in all cases opaque. In applying this as a test, we must remember that a horny or hardened state of the cuticle, or a diseased condition of parts, may interfere with this translucency in the living subject: it is always better seen in the young and in those whose hands are thin. In these cases the fingers appear to be formed of a mass of blood : they have a deep red tint, except about the joints, where the colour appears lighter. The ^T/es.—Shortly after death, the cornea becomes dull, its brightness and prominence disappear, the globe becomes collapsed, and, after a time, the sur- face of the membrane is wrinkled. Louis long since observed, that the eyes of the dead became flaccid and soft in a very few hours after dissolution, and that a film was formed over them ; this condition he considered to be characteristic of death. It is necessary to observe, hoAvever, that while this appearance is not always met with in the dead body, it is sometimes found in the living. In those who have died from apoplexy, or from the inhalation of carbonic acid gas, the eyes have often preserved their brilliancy and prominence for a c 2


[84/1290 b21964944_0084.jp2]

20 SIGNS OF DEATH. STATE OF THE EYES AND SKIN. length of time. This has also been obsevvcd in those who have heen poisoned by prussic acid, cyanide of potassium, or the essential oil of bitter almonds. Incipiint putrefactive chanpres may, by forcing the blood towards the head, cause a prominence and brilliancy of these organs, in those bodies in which they were dull and collapsed soon after death. On the other hand the film over the eye and the collapse of the globe have been observed in cases of malignant cholera several hours before death, and while the heart Avas still beating. ('Ann. d'Hygiene,' 1848,1, 104.) KUssmaul has noticed in reference to the eyes, that no conclusion can be drawn, from the Avidth of the pupils in death, as to the diameter which they presented at the latest period of life. This statement is of s^nue practical impoi-tance in reference to post-mortem appearances in cases of alleged narcotic poisoning. M. Kipault noticed that in real death, the iris is perfectly flaccid. This is seen when the globe is compressed in two oppo- site directions at the same time. If the person is living, the pupil retains its circular form, notwithstanding the compression. If dead, the circular form is lost, and the aperture becomes irregular. Dr. Fleming has noticed that a solution of atropia, which by causing dilatation of the pupil Avould reduce the living iris to a mere line, has no action on the iris of the dead eye ; but the result probably depends on the time after death at which the licpiid is applied. Jobst and Hesse found that two drops of an aqueous solution of phytostygmia (the poisonous alkaloid of the Calabar bean) applied to the eye of a rabbit an hour after death from natural causes, caused the pupil to contract to one-foui-th, compared with the other eye, and it remained in this condition. (' Chem. News,' March 5, 18fi4, p. 109.) The SJdn.—After dissolution, the skin is observed to become extremely pallid and waxy-looking, owing to the absence of all circulation. In some parts it becomes covered, as the body cools, by livid discolourations (cadaveric ecchymosis); this is especially the case in those instances where death has taken place by sudden violence. One of the most striking changes in the skin is its entire loss cf elasticity. In the living body, if any part of the sur- face be compressed, the skin will readily return to its original form on refnoving the ])ressui-e. Thus, in a doubtful case, a flatness of those parts which have been allowed to lie upon an even surface may be regarded as a sign of real death, provided the other concomitant changes are observed. It is almost unnecessary to remark, that if certain diseases have the power of depriving the skin of its elasticity, the history of these cases, or a superficial inspection of the body, will suffice to show to what cause this Avant of elasticity is to be attributed. Among the signs of death has been emunerated coagulation of the blood. M. Donne suggested that, in order to determine the reality of death before the access of putrefaction, a small portion of blood should be draAvn from a vessel, and it should then be observed Avhether it coagulated or not. If instead of a red homogeneous coagulahle liquid Ave obtain only a reddish-coloured uncoagulable serum, from Avhich the particles speedily subsided as a red sedi- ment, Ave shall l)e justified in inferring that life has ceased a conclusion at Avhich Ave could not arrive if even the smallest portion of coagulum should bo formed. This appears to be a fair physiological test, and easy of application. When the blood has once coagulated, there must be an arrest of circulation • and although it might become again fluid, this would be only under the Turtuence of putrefaction, and it would not thereby recover a coao-nlatino- power. One of the gre-.-t characters of blood effused from a Uvinq body i° that It coagulates speedily after its efFusion. Thus, drops from \n ai tcrv thrown on iarniture or a Avail speedily consolidate, assuming an oval or Ion- elhptical f^^rm, the narrow point downwards, and at this part will be found the coagulum of fibrin locking up the red colouring matter. Blood sprinkled


[85/1290 b21964944_0085.jp2]

21 EVIDEXCE FROM THE STATE OF THE BLOOD. from a dead body is more liquid; it forms a long in-egular drop or streak, and only dries up by evaporation; it has no coagulating property. The blood coagxdates in most cases after death, but at a vaiiable time after the cessation of the heart's action. When blood is removed from the living body, coagulation commences in Irom five to ten minutes. In the dead bt)dy, it probably does not commence until it begins to cool. Hence the fact of coagulation does not prove that the person is living. Dr. Wilks has observed that Avhen a body is examined eight or ten hours after death, it is not unusual to find the blood which may have ilowed t'vom it as a liquid, forming a firm clot on the table; and that which is effused into the chest during the exami- nation often forms after some time a very firm coagulum. Guy's Hosjiital Keports,' Oct. 186;3, p. 183.) It has been stated that the blood of persons killed by lightning does not coagulate, but this statement is erroneous. Certain diseases aj^pear to influence the coagidation of the blood. Mr. Savory has observed that coagulation has been partial or imperfect in cases of death irom deliritim tremens; and it is well known that in rapid death from certain vegetable poisons the blood is found fluid and of a darker coloiu* than natural, even when the examination is made soon after death. CHAPTER 2. CADAVERIC SPASM EVIDENCE OF MURDER, SUICIDE, OR ACCIDENT FURNISHED BY THE POSITION OF A DEAD BODY AVEAPONS FOUND IN THE HANDS—MUSCULAH IRRITABILITY—TESTS OF ITS PRESENCE—POST-MORTEM CONTRACTILITY ALLEGED PREMATURE INTERMENTS—PROOFS OF THE REALITY OF DEATH DEATH-TRANCE APPARENT DEATH IN THE DROWNED AND IN NEW-BORN CHILDREN. In reference to persons found dead, the position or attitude of the body, if undisturbed, may often throw an important light on the mode of death, and on the question Avhether the deceased had died by his own act or by the act of another. Cadaveric Spasm.—It has been already stated that, as a general rule, the muscular system passes into a state of relaxation at the momejit of death. This is observed in cases of tetanus of a severe form, whether produced by disease or by poison. Haifa grain of strychnia was given to a i-abbit. After several fits of convulsions the animal died ; respiration ceased in twenty-three minutes. At this time there was perfect flaccidity of the lx>dy, limbs, and joints; but this condition lasted but for a very short period. The animal was placed on its back, and the legs raised, for the purpose of making an examina- tion of the chest. In ten minutes the body became, while still warm, per- fectly rigid in the attitude in which it was held—the fore-legs remaining stretched upwards and wide apart. If an animal dies in a convulsion, and the body is not disturbed, the tetanic spasm may pass rapidly into cadaveric rigidity. This has been called tetanic rigidity, but it is in fact cadaveric rigidity or muscular spasm showing itself in a persistent^ form after death. When the rigid state is destroyed by forcibly bending a joint, the limb will not return to its position like that which is contracted by a tetanic convulsion. Engel has seen this transition from spasm to rigidity; and I have noticed, in experiments on animals, a rigid condition assumed after death without any apparent relaxation of the muscles. Sommer and Clemens liave observed^ in fatal cases of rheumatic tetanus, that the spasm of the muscles of the jaw, neck, and back passed immediately into cadaveric rigidity. (Kiissmaul, loc. cit. -490.)


[86/1290 b21964944_0086.jp2]

ATTITUDES OP THE RECENTLY DEAD. 22 That spasmodic condition of the mitscles which passes into rigidity in death from tetanus, may also show itself in other cases of strong muscular contrac- tion at the moment of death. Thus a body may stiffen or become rigid m an attitude of attack or resistance; the members may retain in a rigid state that position which tlie hxst act of volition imparted to them. The term cadaveric spasm has been applied to this condition of the muscles : it is nothing more than muscular rigidity or violent muscular contraction so rapidly followed by the rigidity of death, that the muscles have not relaxed on the cessation of life. M. Marc first directed the attention of medical jurists to this subject in reference to a case which will be hereafter related. He considered that this form of rigidity might occur as a result of sudden death from apoplexy, and he quotes the following case as an illustration :—An aged man, while at the theatre with his family, rested his forehead upon his hands, which were crossed in front of him, while with his elbows he leaned on the front of the box. It was thought that he had gone to sleep in this attitude, and he was not disturbed ; but after the performance was over and the persons were about to leave the theatre, it was found that he was quite dead. ('Ann.dTIyg.' 1832, 1, G02.) I knew an instance in which a lady who had retired to her bed-room in 2"»ei-fect health was found dead the following morning. She was kneeling at a chair in the attitude of jarayer, and her body had become rigid in this position. This Avas also a case of sudden death from apoplexy. In some instances in which chloroform vapour has caused accidental death, the hand firmly grasping the handkerchief has been found applied to the mouth and nostrils, as if the deceased were still breathing the vapour. From what has been elsewhere stated (page 17), this singular condition of the body is more likely to present itself in those cases in which there has been great muscular exertion, and muscular irritability is nearly exhausted at the moment of death. Corpses have thus been seen stiffened on the battle-field in the last attitude of life. Mr. Russell thus describes what he saw after the battle of the Alma in the Crimean war :—' The attitudes of some of the dead were awful. One man might be seen resting on one knee, with the arms extended in the form of taking aim, the brow compressed, the lips clenched, the very expression of firing at an enemy stamped on the face, and fixed there by death : a ball had struck this man in the neck. Another was lying on his back, with the same expression, and his arms raised in a similar attitude, the Minie musket still grasped in his hands, undischarged. Another lay in a perfect arch, his head resting on one part of the ground and his feet on the other, but the back raised high above it.' Cases of a similar kind were noticed in the Italian war after the battle of Solferino, and in some of the battles in North America between the Federal and Confederate States. (See ' Savory on Life and Death,' p. 192.) In cases of sudden and violent death, it is by no means unusual to find the body, or one or more of the limbs, rigid and fixed in a state of spasmodic contraction. This is sometimes Avitnessed in cases in which persons have died in lull and robust health. The body of a suicide may be discovered stretched on the floor of an apartment, with the suicidal weapon firmly grasped in his hand. Razors and pistols are thus frequently lound in the hands of suicides, whether recently dead, or whether they have been lying some time before they were discovered ; and these instruments may be grasped or held under circumstances which would appear impossible, firom tlieir Aveiglit, were it not well ascertained, that the spasm Avhich often ensues at the moment of death may be retained for a considerable period. In Sept. 188G, a gentleman was oound dead m a chair in his bed-room ; he had shot himself some hour.s before his body was discovered. A discharged pistol was still lield firmly in


[87/1290 b21964944_0087.jp2]

23 CADAVERIC SPASM AND RIGIDITY. his right hand, and there was also a loaded pistol grasped in his left. Instances are irequently occurring, in which razors or knives require to be removed, even with some force, from the hands of those who have destroyed themselves. In such cases, the contractile power, impressed by the last fatal act of volition, persists until cadaveric rigidity has supervened. Devergie observes, that, although in many cases the arms, at the moment of death, fall in a collapsed state by the sides of the body, there are numerous others in which their situation may throw some light on the manner of death. In one case of suicide by a pistol-shot, he found on entering the apartment, the right arm and hand of the deceased turned towards the side of the head, against which the pistol had been fired. A man, who had died from the effects of carbonic acid given out by a limekiln, was found with the left arm raised and supporting his head, the right semiflexed on the abdomen; the whole figure being that of a person quietly asleep. These are curious facts, and deserve to be borne in mind, for questions relating to them arise unexpectedly on trials for murder. Although appar- ently trivial, they may in some instances become the turning points of the guilt or innocence of a person charged with murder. In the case of Lord William Eussellj who was mvirdered by Courvoisier in 1810, it was observed that one hand of the deceased firmly grasped the sheet of the bed, as if in a struggle against an assassin. The force here given to the muscles during life, had persisted after death : it had passed into what has been termed, for want of a better designation, ' cadaveric spasm,' and in this state, the contracted hand had become rigid. This position of the hand of deceased furnished, among other circumstances, some evidence against the presumption of suicide. In drowning, it is by no means unusual to find, when the dead bodies are taken from water soon after the accident, that pieces of rope, an oar, grass similar to that growing on the banks, or weeds like those growing at the bottom of a canal or river, are firmly grasped in the hands. This is one of the strongest proofs which we have that the individual has gone into the water living. Part of a dress may be thus found grasped in the hand, and serve to identify a person accused of murder. In general, Avhen the dead bodies of the recently-drowned are taken from water, the limbs are found relaxed ; but this depends on the period at which they are removed. Convulsions sometimes precede death by asphyxia, but the effects of these on the body are generally lost when the person dies. Rigidity of the muscles takes place after death in water, perhaps more rapidly than in air. If the water is intensely cold, and the person has struggled violently, the last struggles of life may be indicated by the contorted state of the limbs persisting through rigidity. Mr. Beardsley, a former pupil, communicated to me the following case. A young man, while skating, fell through the ice of a pond about seven yards deep. This was in February 1847. He was not totally immersed, for he kept his head and shoulders out of the water above the ice, Avith his arms resting upon it; and as the ice gave way under his weight he sprang to a fresh portion. Before assistance could be rendered, he sank. The body was recovered the next day ; it was found at the bottom of the pond, beneath the hole in the ice. The arms of the de- ceased Avere stiff, and still retained the position in Avliich he had rested upon the ice : his legs Avere quite extended, and the muscles on the fore part ■of the thigh Avere very much contracted, as if they had been powerfully exerted in keeping him erect Avhile he Avas hanging on the ice. There Avas no appearance of his liaving attempted to breathe, after he had gone beloAV the water. Ilis countenance Avas quite natural, and there Avas no Avater or froth in his mouth; the external appearances resembled those Avhich arc seen in a body immersed after death liom soiiic utlier c;iu>e. There Avas no


[88/1290 b21964944_0088.jp2]

24 ARTICLES GRASPED LV THE IIAXDS OF THE DEAD. internal inspection. Mr. Beardsley's opinion was, that the Avater being about 32°, the man was in reality killed by cold, or h-ozen ; and there is no doubt, that if this did not operate as the direct cause ol'death, it materially accelerated it. This case is of interest in reference to the fact of the bodies of persons who have been drowned at the same time, by a common accident, being frequently found clasped in each other's arms. A contracted state of the muscles at the time oi' death may pass into perfect rigidity by the effect of cold water : and thus the attitude, or the last act of life of the individual, may be pre- served. The deceased may be found with some article grasped in the hand. (See case, ' Ann. dTIyg.' 1829, t. 1, p. 4G4). It may be the hair of the deceased or the prisoner's hair torn off in the struggle for life; and on this point an important question of identity may be easily raised. (Reg. v. Ellison, Bodmia Summer Assizes, 1845). In a case which was tried some years since, a man was charged with the murder of a woman Avith whom he cohabited. The body of the deceased was found lying dead in the house, with such injuries about the head, as to render it certain that she must have been murdered. In her right hand, was found a considerable quantity of brown hair, and in the other hand some grey hair, grasped evidently in the struggle for life. The morning following the murder the prisoner went to a hairdi-esser's in the town, and desired to have his hair and whiskers cut. This man observed that the hair and whiskers had been recently cut, and evidently by some one unaccustomed to hair-cutting. There was a difference between the hair of the whiskers and that of the head, the former having turned grey. The hairdresser Avas of opinion, that the hair found in the hands of the deceased, was of the same colour and kind as the hair of the prisoner. This, Avith other corroborating circumstances, led to his conviction. In a case Avhich occurred to Dr. Marc, a Avoman A\^as found assassinated in her house, and Avhen the body Avas discoA'ered, a small snuff- box Avas still held firmly in one hand. This proved that the murder must have taken place very suddenly, and Avithout any resistance on the part of the deceased. ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1829, t. 1, p. 4Go.) Great light is often throAvn upon a question of suicide or murder by atten- tion being paid to these minute points connected Avith a dead body. Wea])ons, such as pistols or razors, are often found forcibly grasped in the hands of persons Avho have destroyed themselves ; and Avhen a Aveapon is thus found, the fact is strongly confirmatory of suicide. It does not seem possible that a murderer could simulate this condition after destroying the deceased. The hand of a dead person, Avhile still Avarni and pliant, could not be made to grasp a Aveapon in the same way as that hand Avhich had firmly held it by powerful muscular contraction at the last moment of life. At any rate, the attempt to produce this appearance has signally failed. At the trial of a man named Saville, in 1844, it came out in evidence, that the deceased, his Avife, was found dead Avith her throat severely cut, and there Avas a razor, not gi-asped, but lying loosely in her hand. There Avas no blood upon the hand Avhich held the razor, and this, together Avith the fact of its being loose, ren- dered it certain that the Aveapon had been placed there by some person, after the throat of the deceased had been cut. The case of the Avoman Gardner (Reg. v. Gardner, C. C. C, Oct. 1862) was marked by a similar incident. The Avoman had died from several wounds in the throat which could not have been self-inflicted, and a common table-knife was ff)nnd loosely lying in her right hand, Avith the back of the blade towards the palm of the hand, and the Aveapon in the direction of the length of the body. According to the evidence of the medical witnesses the principal wound in the throat, was of such a nature that it could not have been


[89/1290 b21964944_0089.jp2]

25 EVIDENCE OF HOMICIDE OR SUICIDE. inflicted witli the right hand. This at once proved that there liad been nuir- derous interference. On these occasions it may be suggested that a weapon, aUhouglx grasped by an alleged suicide to inHict the death--wound, may either drop from the hand or be found loosely in it, as a result of the relax- ation of the muscles in death. This must be admitted ; hence the mere fact of a weapon being found loose, should not be taken as evidence of murder, unless other circumstances—such as the nature of the wound, the freedom of the hand from blood, the position of the body, &c.— concur to prove that the act was not one of suicide. Kiissmaul asserts that the fact of a weapon, whether a razor, knife, or pistol, being found firmly grasped, shovild not be taken as any proof of suicide ; because if this position be given to the fingers when in the stage of relaxation, they will in that of rigidity, embrace the article so closely, that it will be difficult to disengage it. He gives this as a mere surmise, and not as being based on any experiment. That it should present itself as a serious objection in practice, w'e nuist infer that assassins are fully aware of the forensic necessity of causing the hand of the victim to grasp the weapon with the greatest firmness, and that they can remain by the corpse tluis holding the hand clenched, until the fingers have stiffened with sufficient firnmess to retain it ! Assuming this improbable state of things, other circiunstances, as in Gardner's case, may show that the weapon after all has been placed in the wrong hand, or that the blood-marks on it and on the hand, have no correspondence. The difficulty of thus en- ■(leavouring to imitate on act of suicide, when the facts are properly observed and compared, will be apparent from the following case, which was tried at the Liverpool Assizes, LSo") (Reg. v. Hey wood). The deceased in this case, a female, was ft)und dead in bed with her throat cut. The medical evidence showed that the wound was six inches from right to left, extending aci'oss the throat to a point under the left ear : the u])per portion of the windpipe was severed, and the jugular vein, as well as the muscular branches of the carotid artery, were divided. The medical witnesses considered that the wound in the throat had not been inflicted by herself It was such a wound as a left-htmdQd person would have inflicted, and the hand inflicting it, as well as the w^eapon, could not have escaped being marked with blood. It appears that when the body was found, there was a razor in the 7-ight hand, not tightly held. The arms were folded across the chest, the right hand resting on the left, the back of the razor being towards the person of deceased. There was 7io blood on the hands, arms, or chest, and only one small spot on the razor. There was blood on the under-side of a pillow, and a corre- sponding stain on the bolster, showing tliat this must have been turned over, and the head placed on the clean side after the infliction of the wound. All the circumstances concurred in showing, that an attempt had been made to simulate an act of suicide, while the facts were only consistent with homicide. The prisoner was connected with the act by the moral as well as circum- stantial evidence, and he was convicted and executed. Neither during nor after the cessation of rigidity could this spasmodic condition of the muscles of the hand be simulated ; in no case, it appears to me, is it possible to give an appearance of grasping, similar to that which is occasionally found after death as a result of cadaveric spasm and rigidity. It is strange that the discovery of a weapon thus held in a dead hand, should have been assumed to furnish evidence of murder. The following case is, in this point of view, worthy of notice. On July 5, 1835, a medical practitioner of Bordeaux Avas called to examine the body of a gentleman sup- posed to have been murdered. Upon entering the apartment, which had been left undisturbed, he found the deceased perfectly dead, sitting in an arm-chair l)y the side of the bod, tlie left elbow resting upon the bolster.


[90/1290 b21964944_0090.jp2]

26 EVIDENCE OF HOMICIDE OR SUICIDE. His right hand, Avhich held a recently-discharged pistol, rested upon the middle of the right tliigh, the greater part of the barrel projecting over the inner surflice of the thigh, so that the slightest motion of the part, would apparently have been sufficient to cause it to fall cn the floor. The bullet, which could not be found, had fractured and traversed the left parietal bone, after having torn off nearly the whole of the face. The clothes of the de- ceased were saturated with blood; a large quantity had also drained through the seat of the chair, and had formed a considerable clot on the floor. The temperature of the body indicated that the deceased had not been dead above two hours; and it was at about that time, that the discharge of a pistol had been heard by some of the neighbours. The other facts ascertained relative to the case, were that the deceased, who was about sixty years of age, had never shoAvn any disjDosition to destroy himself; and there was no moral circumstance which seemed likely to have acted as an exciting cause, except perhaps the loss of a law-suit by a favourite sister, which, however, was deemed scarcely suflicient to explain the event. He had a son, who lived in the house with him, and slept in the same room. They were both dissijiated in their habits. On the morning of the event, after breakiast, the son (according to his own statement) threw himself on his bed, which was by the side of that of his father; he fell asleep, and knew nothing of the circumstance until he was roused out of his sleep by the dis- charge of a pistol. The son was accused of having destroyed his father, and of having placed the pistol in the hand of his parent after death, in order to lead to the supposition of suicide. This circumstance seemed so murh the more probable to the police officers and those who were present at the finding of the body, since, when the hand with the pistol was carefully carried to the position, in which the Aveapon must have been held by the deceased in order to have committed the fatal act himself, and the hand was afterwards allowed to fall by its own weight, the pistol each time fell from the hand to the floor. Besides, on the moral side of the question, it was shown, that the son would be benefited by the death of the father. The medical examiner having duly reflected on the position in which the deceased was discovered, satisfactorily accoimted for the hand retaining the pistol after death by the contractile state of the muscles, from the effect of volition at the moment of death being sufficiently strong to prevent the weapon from falling. The experiments performed with the hand and pistol subsequently were very properly stated to be unsatisfactory ; since, when this contracted state of the muscles has bet-n once destroyed by much hand- ling, it could not be restored. The specious argument thus founded upon a popular error, Avas by the tact of the medical witness satisfactorily refuted. The reporter of the case candidly confesses that, owing to his having been misled by popular prejudice, he Avas at first almost inclined to believe that the son had been guilty of parricide; and probably if a hasty and careless ex- amination had been made, or if the body had been officiously interfered Avith previously to its being seen by a medical man, the son might have been com- mitted for trial on the charge. So soon as this apparently physical proof of his guilt had been explained aAvay, it Avas then seen, that all the other circumstances rebutted the presumption of homicide. The discovery of a weapon so held, is one of the best possible proofs of suicide. The postures, in Avhich the bodies of persons found dead from any cause, are discovered, may, in numerous cases, be brought forAvard to support a charge of murder, or, at least, of criminal interference: but great care is always required in the application of medical principles to the elucidation of


[91/1290 b21964944_0091.jp2]

IXPERENCE OF HOMICIDE FROM FOSITION OF THE BODY. 27 these cases, .as well as a good general acquaintance -with the various phe- nomena iunnediatelv preceding and following death. As the body becomes rigid in the position in which it happens to be on cooling, and assumes exactly the attitude of the person at the time of death, careful observation may, in some instances, show whether, in a case of violent death, it was or was not interfered with before rigidity took place. A ques- tion of this kind arose in the following case. The deceased was found lying dead in the room where the murder had been perpetrated ; there were marks of blood in various places, and the body had evidently been removed from the spot where it had fallen : it had been laid out. The clothes had been tucked round it, and a piece of black cloth had been placed over the face. A question arose as to whether the body had been thvis removed before or after rigidity occurred ? As it was found evenly laid out, the probability was, that it had been removed while the limbs were pliant; and they had then become rigid in this position. If a body be removed during tlie state of rigidity, it may be in some instances indicated by the position of the still rigid limbs, not being adapted to the surface on Avhich the body is found lying. It has been already stated that the first effect of death, in the absence of cadavei'ic spasm, is relaxation of the muscles; the body then disposes itself according to the siirface on which it happens to be lying; the arms or legs may be more or less fixed or contorted, and become rigid in the position which they assumed by gravitation at the time of death. The lower jaw, if left to itself, drops and becomes rigid in this position. When a body is found rigid, Avith the members evenly extended, and the jaws closed, this is, cceteris paribus, strongly indicative of interference while there was warmth and pliancy in the limbs. When, on the other hand, the body is found rigid and doubled up, with the limbs more or less twisted lying on an even surface like a bed, the probability is, according to circum- stances, that the body has been moved from the spot in which the person had died, and in which rigidity had sujDerv'ened. In suicidal hanging, the body, and especially the extremities, are now and then found twisted in a singular manner around articles of furniture. In such cases, the general muscular convulsion, at the moment of death, will physiologically explain, Avhat to uninformed persons may appear physically incompatible with the deceased having destroyed himself. The following case will serye as an illustration of the occasional importance of these inquiries. In June 1835, Robert Reid was tried before the High Court of Justiciary, at Edinburgh, for the murder of his wife. A report of this trial was published by Dr. Fletcher, wlio, although not a witness, lent his medico-legal assistance to the prisoner. Among the medical circumstances which gave rise to conflicting opinions was one which referred to the posture in which the body of the decea.sed Avas found, at half-past two o'clock, on Saturday, Septem- ber 20, 1834, the day of the supposed murder. It was thus described by the witnesses. ' She (deceased) was sitting on the floor by the side of the bed, nearly naked, with a portion of the bed-clothes wrapt around the lower part of her body ; the head erect, but inclined a little backwards and to one side, the face being towards the bed. The left arm hung down by her side, with the back of the hand on the ground, the right arm resting by the elbow on the bed, and maintained in the upright position without any further support, as if she had been in the act of putting it to her iltce. The legs were crossed under the trunk, the left being less protruded than the right.' This extraordinary posture was prestimed by all who saw it, and by the medical witnesses for the prosecution, to be stich, that the deceased could not


[92/1290 b21964944_0092.jp2]

28 POSITIOX OF THE DEAD BODY. have assnmed it herself in the act of dying; and this was rendered still less l)robable, when it was considered tliat the cervical veitebraj were fractured, and one of them was displaced, so that she had probably died a violent and very sudden death. The attitude appeared to be also quite irreconcilable with the supposition of death from accident or suicide. The chief question seems to have hccn, whether, admitting that the prisoner had actually placed his wife in this posture, the maintenance of it was to be ascribed to a convul- sive spasm, simultaneously occurring with death, or to the supervention of ordinary cadaveric rigidity. If the posture were admitted to have been due to cadaveric rigidity naturally supervening, then the inference would be that deceased had been dead, at least, some hours. The prisoner was proved to liave been at home from nine until half-past nine : the deceased's body Avas discovered at two, and as the prisoner had not been at the house between half-past nine and tAvo, so it followed that, supposing him to have been guilty, he nuist have committed the mu.rder during the half hour that he was at home. Hence, cadaveric rigidity must have come on in four hours and a half after death. Bnt, on the other hand, it was lU'ged, that the attitude of the body, and the singular perpendicular position of the right arm, were due to a spasmodic contraction of the muscles in a fit, at the moment of death, persisting under the form of cadaveric spasm. The non-medical witnesses stated that the body of the deceased when foitnd was penectl}'^ flexible, and the arms and legs so pliant, that they could be easily stretched doAvn ; indeed, the Avhole body was so yielding as to admit of its being directly laid out at length on the floor. The body was partially Avarm Avhen first found, but, as it has been already obserA^ed, this is quite compatible Avith the occurrence of rigidity. Certainly, hoAvever, Avhere a body is warm and the members are easily moved from their position, the presump»tion is rather in favour of the fixed posture being due to muscular spasm than to cadaveric rigidity. The Avitnesses for the prosecution considered that the posture of the deceased was OAving to simple rigidity. Dr. Fletcher atten)pts to explain the facts by supposing that the deceased had probably fallen in a fit Avhile getting out of b'^d, during the absence of the prisoner; admitting that the prisoner might on his entrance, at about nine o'clock, have attempted to raise the body, and thus have given the erect position to the trunk ; Avhile the perpendicular position of the arm Avas entirely due to spasm. It Avas urged that the Avoman had been previously subject to slight paralysis and convriJsive fits, and that the occurrence of a fit, under the circumstances, Avas not unlikely. The posi- tion Avas not such as Ave might suppose a body to assume, Avhen a person has died under a catalej^tic seizure. On the other side, it Avas considered to be improbable, that the prisoner could have placed the deceased in the attitude in Avhich she Avas discovered, admitting her to have died in any other posture—since at the time he did it, the body must have been either rigid or not. If it were rigid, he could not easily have bent the members from the position Avhich they had already assumed ;—and if it Avere not rigid, he must have used artificial means to keep the members and trunk in the extraordinary position in Avhich they Avere found: for it Avas not likely that he Avould have purposely held her head and arm in such a singular attitude, until her body had become fixed. Indeed, in order to accomplish this, he must liave Avaited itntil it had become cold, Avhereas it is stated to have been found Avith some Avarmth and pliancy about it. Besides, it would be impossible to assign any reason for his so doing, since he Avould be ignorant of the medical difficulty connected Avith it. The prisoner Avas dischai-ged on a verdict of not proven, because it Avas not satisfactorily made out that he had really caused his Avife's death. Th<5 state


[93/1290 b21964944_0093.jp2]

29 CASES OF PlEID AXD COUllBOX. in Avhicli the body was founcl, created a presumption that tlie deceased had died, from natural causes, not long before the discoveiy of her body;—there- ibre, at some time between half-past nine and two, and while the prisoner Avas absent from the house. The account of this case, as given by Dr. Fletcher, is of course made out in the most favourable way for the prisoner. Having been employed as medical counsel on the occasion, he suggested many ingenious explanations for circumstances which were certainly very strong against the prisoner. The verdict of ' not proven' sufficiently attests the opinion of the jury ; and had the medical evidence respecting the cause of death from violence, been a little more clearly made out, there is hardly a doubt that the prisoner Avould have been convicted. Whether this was a case of death from natural causes, or, as alleged, from an injiuy to the spinal marrow, we must regard the attitude in Avhich the body was discovered as very unusual. There were difficulties in the way of an. explanation, whether we suppose the prisoner to have interfered or not with the position of his wife's body. Had a proper examination been made by medical men Avhen it was first discovered by the neighbours, some of these difficulties would not probaljly have existed. With a fracture of the denti- form process, and a dislocation of the first and second vertebrte, it is not likely, unless the body had been supported mechanically by the clothes which it is Siiid presented the appearance of having been dragged off the bed with it, that a person so injured would die in the attitude in which the deceased was dis- covered, or that she could have had the power to assume it spontaneously after such a severe injury to the spinal column. The probability is, that the body would have been found lying on the floor. A question was raised upon this trial respecting the duration of muscular spasm after death : and this may become at some future time, a point upon Avhich a medical witness may be required to express an opinion. There is but little doubt, from numerous collateral facts, that it may remain for a con- siderable time afler death ; and even pass into cadaveric rigidity, /. a. the posture assumed by a limb fj-om spasm, at the moment of death, may be retained as the posture of cadaveric rigidity, supposing the body not to have been disturbed. An instance is reported, in Avhich a drowned subject, after liaving remained in water from twelve to fourteen hours, was drawn up with his hands still grasping firmly the cable of a vessel, Avhich he had caught hold of in the act of drowning. The bodies of persons drowned in a common accident, are found not unfrequently after twenty-four hours firmly locked to"-ether by their arms, Avhen taken out of water cold and rigid. In persons who die under violent spasmodic contraction of the muscles, as in cholera and tetanus, whether from natural causes or the effects of strychnia, the state of spasna is sometimes so preserved after death, as to pass into rigidity. The attitude in Avhich a dead body is found rigid, may easily give rise to an erroneous suspicion of murder. The following case has been reported by M. Marc: The deceased, Courbon, was found dead in a ditch; his head was bent upon his chest, and the lower part of the trunk was so curved, that the whole weight was borne by the neck. The body was A'ery rigid, but thei-e. were some slight traces of warmth Avhen it Avas found. On inspection there Avere all the appearances of apoplexy, and the deceased Avas Avell known to have been of drunken habits. NotAvithstanding these flicts, two persons Averc convicted of murder upon some loose evidence,—principally on the ground that the un- natural position in Avhich the deceased's body Avas found could only be explained on the supposition of murderous interfei-ence. The accused Avere condemned to the gallies for life ; but after tAVO years' punishment, a proper medical inves- tigation of the facta Avas for the first time instituted, and they Avere discharged.


[94/1290 b21964944_0094.jp2]

SIGNS OF DEATH. .AlUSCULAR IRRITABILITY. 30 The evidence established that the deceased had died of apoplexy; and that the body had assumed the peculiar position in which it was discovered owing to the deceased having fallen into the ditch in a state of drunkenness, by wliich he was rendered helpless and incapable of extricating himself (' Ann. d'Hyg.' 1832, 1, 509.) While, then, rigidity may sometimes indicate murder, or some form of violent death, by fixing the body in a position which it could not naturally have assumed, and which cannot be easily altei-ed during the rigid state, Ave must beware that we do not give an undue importance to this sign of death as a pi'oof of violent usage. This caut>ion is especially required in the cases of drunkards, for the body of a person who dies in a fit of drunkenness may be found contoi'ted and disposed in a way which is apparently comp)atible neither with accident nor Avith suicide. 4. Muscular Irritability.—In order to determine the reality of death, it has been proposed to test the irritability of the muscles by the application of an electric current. If a voluntary muscle laid bare for this purpose,does not con- tract under the application of this stimulus, the inference is that the person is dead; but if it should contract under these circumstances, it furnishes no proof that the pei'son is living, in the ordinary meaning of the word. It has been else- where stated that the heart and involuntary muscles, wdiich are readily affected by a mechanical stimulus soon after death, lose their irritability or power of contraction, even under a galvanic current, much sooner than the voluntary muscles. As a result either of disease or exhaustion, of the action of Certain poisons, or of the effect of lightning, the irritability of the whole muscular system may be entirely destroyed at the time of death ; in these cases no stimulus would excite muscular contraction. Under these circumstances rigidity and putrefaction so ra^iidly follow, that the application of electricity fur additional evidence would be superfluous. On the other hand, in certain cases, as in the body of a decapitated man, Avhos". case is recorded by Nysten, the irritability of the muscles may remain for twenty-six hours after death. In short it is now known, that until cadaveric rigidity commences in the body, muscular irritability is retained. When this commences it begins to disappear. Contractility of the muscles under the current Avould, therefore, prove either that the person was living, or that the body was in the first stage of death. All the muscles do not retain tins irritability under the electric stimulus for the same length of time, nor do they all lose at once their sus- ceptibility of contraction. One degree of stimulus may excite them, while another may not. Dr. Dowler, of Ncav Orleans, has shown by numerous experiments on the recently dead body, that post-mortem contractility may be excited by slio-ht blows on the muscles given Avith the hand or any weapon, and thus electricity may be dispensed Avith. When the arm of a recently dead pei-son Avas ex- tended at a right angle with the trunk, a bloAv over the biceps muscle, not suf- ficient to injure a living person, caused the forearm to bend, carrying the hand to the chest repeatedly. In fact, before rigidity set in, the arm of this corpse, by the mere effect of slight bloAvs, performed supination, pronation and. flexion most perfectly. This effect of slight mechanical violence is most dis- tinctly observed Avithin half an Jiour, but Dr. DoAvler has seen it manifested as late as six or seven hours, after death. It disappears Avhen rigidity sets in. (' Experimental Kesearches on Post-mortem Contractility,' by Bennet DoAvler* New York, 184G, p. 601.) ' It is a curious liict that the blood has no appreciable influence upon the post-mortem contractility of the muscles, because when the limb Avas severed from the trunk, and drained of its blood, its action was not thereby diminished.


[95/1290 b21964944_0095.jp2]

t'ESSATION OF MUSCULAII JrvlUTACJLlTV. 31 ('Am. J. Med. Sc.,' Oct. 184G, p. 440.) Contractions as the result of sliglit blows were observed in forty-three cases. The contractions were in many cases so forcible, as to cause a heavy weight to be lifted by the limb in which they occun-ed. The integrity of the corpse was not necessary; they were excited some hours after the dissection of the body, and after the limbs Avere severed from the trunk. Dr. Dowler considers that these muscular contrac- tions have occurred spontaneously after the death of the body. Spontaneous movements in a corpse have been seen after death from cholera (case by Mr. Rumse}', p. 11), and the .same may take place after death Irom yellow fever and other diseases. Dr. Dowder suggests that the changes in the position of the limbs of bodies sometimes ob.served after death, which have given rise to tales of premature interment, may be explained by the occurrence of spon- taneous post-mortem contractions, depending on the long retention of muscular irritability in a high degi ee. Haller endeavoured to lay down the order of cessation of this irritability in different muscles after death. Many physiolo- gists since his time have also occupied themselves with this question. Plaller found that it varied according to the kind of stimulus em^iloyed : thus the irritability of the heart was excited by mechanical agents for a longer period than any other part of the muscular system ;—a circumstance which was sup- posed to account for the reports of persons having been dissected alive, to be Ibund recorded in some works on Medical Jui-isprudence, an accidental puncture by the knife or forceps having given rise to contractions of this organ. But to admit this explanation, we must suppose that the body was inspected within one or two hours after death. Nysten concluded from his observations that the si;ccessive disappearance of muscular irritability in the bodies of decapitated persons took place in the following order :—1. The left ventricle of the heart. 2. The stomach and intestines. 3. The urinary bladder. 4. The right ventricle. 5. The oesophagus. G. The iris ; and 7. The voluntary muscles of the body. The power of making the muscles contract under the electric current, has been found to vary according to the nature of the disease of which the indi- vidual died. When it was such as to exhaust the strength, the time was very short. From experiments performed at La Charite, it appeared that in death from peritonitis, irritability ceased in about three hours ; in phthisis, sciri'hus, and cancer, in from three to six hours; in death from profuse ha;morrhage, or from mortal lesions of the heart, in about nine hours ; in apoplexy with paralysis, in twelve hours; and in low fevers and pneumonia, the irritability disappeared in from ten to fifteen hours. In these experiments, the muscles of the trunk and limbs alone were examined; since it is upon these, should the necessity ever occur, that a practitioner nuist operate. Although the periods are thus laid down in figures, yet the results must be regarded only in the light of approximations to the truth. We have noAv to apply these different data, connected with death and the changes of the dead body, to the solution of some medico-legal questions— such as the reality of death and the period at which death has taken place. The Eeality of Death.—This question, of coiirse, can only be raised in the period preceding the oecuiTence of putrefaction ; therefore our observations on this point may be restricted within a very narrow compass. The question, indeed, might be passed over altogether, as unimportant, were it not that many men ranking high in the profession, have devoted much attention to the sub- ject ; and have thought themselves justified, from their observations, in declaring that premature interment was not unfrequently the means of consign- ino- livino- individuals to the tomb. There is something terrible in admitting


[96/1290 b21964944_0096.jp2]

ALLEGl^D niEMATUKE IXTERMEXTS. 32 the bare possibility of such an event; and, therefore, we onght not to reject the supposition, without examining the numerous cases wliicli Jiaye been brought forward in support of it. In the work of M. Fontenelle, published some years since, yy/-^^?/-6i/a; cases are recorded, either of the j)remature interment of the living, or of apparent being mistaken for real death. From a careful exami- nation of all these cases, it appears to me that the greater number of them are derived from such sources, as to render them perfectly inadmissible as evidence of what M. Fontenelle so strenuously endeavours to prove. He has collected^ these cases from every source, whether scientific or not, from the time of Plutarch doAvnwards. This very circumstance would make reasonable men distrust those instances of supposed death which are undoubtedly authentic, did not the facts appear explicable on the most common physiological principles. The fears which Avorks like that of M. Fontenelle are likely to excite, respecting premature interment, have been kept up by other French Avriters. M. Carre maintained tliat there was 7io certain sign.of death but putrefaction; and that no body should undergo interment until this process had become plainly manifested. According to this gentleman, a presumption of death may be deduced from a great number of signs ; a jirobabilitij, from the combination of some of the most important, such as the collapse of the eyes, and especially cadaveric rigidity : but absolute certainty could only be obtained by the occur- rence of the putrefactive process. Like other terrorists, M. Carre attacked each sign of death individually, but he wholly concealed the fact, that a judg- ment in proper hands was always formed from the combination of many signs or conditions; and that medical men are not responsible for the results, when, the decision of an important question of this kind, is entrusted to ignorant and uneducated persons. A petition was, on one occasion, presented to the French Chamber of Deputies, in which the petitioner declared that he had known six interments of living persons to have taken place Avithin a period of eight months ! Resting on similar authority, M. Carre asserts that since 1833, there have been forty-six cases of premature burial. Among tliese, twenty- one persons returned to life at the time they were about to be deposited in the earth : nine recovered owing to the affectionate attentions of their relatives : four from the accidental falling of the coffins : two from a feeling of suffoca- tion in their coffins : three fi-om the punctui-es of pins in fastening the shrouds : and seven from unusual delay in the funerals : and, it is added, after this marvellous recital, that the decease of all these individuals was officially attested ! A statistical calculation is then made by him fi-om the deaths which occur annually in Paris, of the average number of persons who were likely to be buried alive. Statements of this kind can only be received with incredulity, since no particulars by Avhich their accui-acy can be tested are given. The cases of alleged premature interment that have yet been adduced, will not bear a close examination, as they are nothing more than the idle tales of ignorant and superstitious persons with the usual amount of exaggeration. In this country we have no official attestation of death by specially appointed persons; but if the account given by M. Carre be true, we have no reason to regret the absence of this system; since it is doubtful whether, undei- the practice of the ancient searchers of London in the worst days of the Pla"-ue, when bodies Avere indiscriminately thrown into large pits soon after death greater negligence could have been shoAvn than that Avhich is here alleo-ed to have occurred on the part of the French officials in modern times. Cases have undoubtedly presented themselves in Avhich persons labourino- under concussion, syncope, catalepsy, hysteria, or lifelessness from exhaustion" have been pronounced dead by ignorant and uninformed bystanders, merely because there happened to be inanimation, coldness of the surface^ and no


[97/1290 b21964944_0097.jp2]

MISTAKES RESPECTIXG THE SIGNS OF DEATH. 33 outward signs of respiration or circulation. If the decision of the question of life or death was always left to such persons, and interments were to follow in a few hours upon their dictation, there is no doubt that living persons would be exposed to the risk of premature burial. But this can scarcely happen in any civilized country of Europe, and certainly not in England. In France tlie law ordains that every death must be verified by a medical officer ; and no interment shall take place until alter the lapse of twenty-four hours from the time of death. This rule, it is said, applies only to Paris and some of the chief i cities of France. No inspection of a body is allowed to take place, and no interment to be made until after a certificate of death has been issued by the proper officer. A similar law prevails in Naples and in Portugal: but Fontenelle I states that in the latter country, as well as in Spain, bodies are sometimes in- I terred within Jive or six hours after death. In the Protestant parts of Germany and Switzerland, the dead are rarely buried until after the lapse of three days, a period being fixed by laAv, before which interment cannot take place. In this country there are no legal provisions relative to the period of interment; but, except under severe and continuous epidemics, the dead are rarely buried until after the lapse of from one to five days. It would, no doubt, be a good regulation if every dead body were seen and examined by a medical man twenty-four hours after death, and the fact of death were officially attested by him according to circumstances. The defect of the continental system is, that a medical opinion may be given at any time after the supposed decease, and there may be occasionally gi-eat negligence in the performance of this. I duty. Still it is impossible to admit that, except xmder the most culpable neglect, persons can inciir the risk of being buried alive, when the body has been kept at least twenty-four hours from the period of the supposed decease. It is stated on good authority that in a period of fifty years, during which mortuary houses have been established in various cities of Germany, no body deposited therein has ever been restored to life, when death had been already certified by a medical man. Such establishments are therefore not required if ordinary care is employed in making an examination (' Ann. d'Hyg.' 1848, 1, 107). Non-professional persons may readily mistake a state of insensibility for death, and in acting upon this belief, may lead to the death of a living person, j Mr. Guthrie mentions the case of a man labouring under concussion, while 1 on board a vessel. He was supposed by his brother and the captain to be dead or dying, and without being able to make any movement to indicate i that he was alive and understood their conversation, he heard them discussing the question whether his body should be buried at sea or carried on to Eotterdam. Fortunately the latter alternative was adopted. Mr. Druitt reports two cases of a somewhat similar kind. A gentleman who was most severely affected with cholera in India, told him that when the disease had gained the complete mastery over him, he lay utterly deprived of speech and motion, whilst he could distinctly hear his attendants, who con- ceived him to be insensible, speculate on the time of his decease, which they judged to be very near at hand. He then, besides being speechless, became blind and deaf; but although thus cut off from all communication with the external world, and in common language insensible, he still retained his consciousness and self-possession, and reflected on his apparently inevitable death. Afterwards he lost all thought and consciousness, and remained thus on the very threshold of death for some hours ; his recovery being an instance of the capriciousness of this terrible disease, which so often sets all medical calculations at defiance, causing the living to appear as if dead, and. sometimes imparting to the dead, the heat and spontaneous movements of the living body.


[98/1290 b21964944_0098.jp2]

34 CERTIFICATES OF DEATH. The other case was that of a boy, a^t. 6, the son of a milliner in Regent Street. He had the small-pox, was pronounced dead, and his body was put mto a coffin. After some hours, he became conscious, heard the voice of his mother, who sat by the coffin, and he essayed to speak ; but, as he afterwards said, he was unable to make any movement or sound. At last, however, his mother's attention was drawn to some apparent change in the features : she watched him nar- rowly, perceived the lips to quiver, and soon he was able faintly to articulate a wish for wine ('Ed. Monthly Journal,' April 1844, p. 355). These two cases have led the reporter to believe in the possibility of the hasty interment of the living as dead, while the unfortunate person is conscious of his condi- tion, but unable to communicate his feelings to others. Mistakes of this kind are not likely to be made by medical men. In order to avoid the possibility of such occurrences, no interment should be allowed to take place until after the lapse of twenty-four hours, at the least, from the time of the supposed death ; and not even then, except upon the certificate of a medical practitioner who has examined the body. At present the cause of death is certified, and a body cannot be buried except upon the certificate of the registrar; but the medical attendant has it in his power to give this certificate without seeing or examining the body of the deceased at that period after death which is necessary for the clear deve- lopment of the signs of dissolution. Hence, unless, as it commonly happens, the interment be delayed by the relatives for twenty-four hoiirs at the least, there might be a risk of prematurely consigning a living person to the grave. During the prevalence of epidemic disease, as in the time of the cholera, a provision was made, that interments should not be delayed beyond twenty- four hours, when death had taken place from the disease. There is no doubt that many bodies were interred during the raging of the epidemic Avithin eight or ten hours after apparent death. One instance was communicated to me Avhere the body was wrapped in a pitch cloth and buried Avithin six hours after the signs of life had ceased. This was assuredly a most condemnable practice, especially in cases where the deceased had not been attended by a. medical practitioner. Under no circumstances should a body be buried within a shorter period than twenty-four hours, when death has taken place ' from chronic disease, or without any obvious and satisfactory cause. No' possible mischief can result to the living by the adoption of such a practice; while it would effectually guard against premature interment among the lower ' classes of society. In assigning twenty-four hours, this is to be taken as an i average period; there are cases in which the most striking phenomena off death, such as coldness and rigidity, may manifest themselves within a muchi shorter time than this, and in such cases a medical opinion may be given i without any difficulty. No coroner's inquest should be held upon a body ? until twenty-four hours after death. I have heard, however, of one instance: in which an inquest was held on a body half an hour only after the apparentt cessation of life. If we allow a proper interval to elapse after the supposed death, there can i be no difficulty in solving the question, whether a person is really dead eveni before any of those changes, which arise from putrefaction, have manifested i themselves. The circumstances on which we may rely as furnishing conclu- - sive evidence of death, are the following:—1. The absence of circulation) and respiration for at least an hour, the stethoscope being employed if neces- sary; 2. The gradual cooling of the body, the trunk remaining warmi while the mernbers are cold; and 3. As the body cools, the gradual super-- vention of a rigid state of the muscles, successively attacking the limbs and; trunk, and ultimately spreading through the whole muscular system. . When these conditions are observed, the proof of death is conclusive; it iss


[99/1290 b21964944_0099.jp2]

MORTUAEY INSTITUTIONS. 3^. nnnecessary to wait for any sign of putrefaction. Tliese changes are as cer- tainly the forerunners of putrefaction as the process of putrefaction is itself the forerunner of the entire destruction of the body. I believe it may be safely said that there has not been a single instance of resuscitation after rigidity had once commenced in a body. During the raging of epidemics, if additional evidence be required for early burial, it might be obtained by exposing a superficial muscle to the galvanic stimulus. If the fibres do not contract, death is certain. If they do, this is no proof that the person can be restored to active life; but further time may be allowed before the body is committed to the grave. So much alarm exists in some continental states relative to premature in- terments, that there are attached to the cemeteries of some great cities apart- ments, kept at a high temperature, where the bodies of the recently dead are deposited, and closely watched until putrefaction commences. Assistants are at hand with necesfsary apparatus for reviving those who may show any indi- cation of returning life. Such institutions must be regarded as superfluous when ordinaiy care is taken by the relatives of a deceased person. I have not met with any instance in which a body laid out in them, was resuscitated after there had been a proper verification of death (p. 33). In the following case death was only apparent, but the fact created no difficulty. In December 1830, M. Ancelon was called to see a woman, set. 34, and was informed on his arrival that she had been dead for more than half an hour. On examination, no signs of respiration could be detected, the pulse could not be felt, the skin was livid, the belly soft and flaccid, and the arms and legs were cold. It appeared that the woman had suffered from uterine haemorrhage up to the time of her supposed death. He removed the contents of the uterus, and at this time a bubble of air was observed to escape from the mouth of the woman. On clearing the uterus, signs of life were gradually manifested by the woman. The respiration, indicated at first by air-bubbles, which suc- ceeded one another on the lips, slowly returned; the circulation was also reestablished. She did not recover her intelligence for three days (' Monthly Jour. Med. Sci.' Oct. 1854, and 'American Jour. Med. Sci.' Jan. 1855, p. 268). This woman was not dead, but in a prolonged syncope from excessive ha'moiThage. Auscultation was not resorted to, or the soimds of the heart might probably have been heard, although the pulse could not be felt. In a few remarkable cases of an authentic character, the process of putre- faction has been considerably retarded, and coldness and rigidity have not manifested themselves in the ordinary course. Such cases of apparent death would necessarily give rise to doubt; the phenomena observed were probably owing to the presence of some traces of molecular life persisting in the body after active life had entirely ceased. One of the most singular of these cases was reported some years since in Hufeland's ' Journal of Practical Medicine.' A young man, who was a patient in the hospital of Paderborn in Prussia, died, as it was supposed, under symptoms of phthisis, but not of a well- marked character. He had recently recovered from an attack of ague. The cause of death appears to have been obscure, and after, as it was believed, he had expired, his eyes were suddenly opened, and the physicians thought they detected for some minutes an irregular beating of the pulse. Some wounds and cauterizations were made on the body without arousing him, and on the third and fourth days these, it is said, had passed into a state of sup- puration. On the fifth day his right hand turned back and closed; from the fifth to the ninth day a clammy perspiration was perceived upon the skin, and some vesicles containing serum were formed on the skin of the back. During this time there was no appearance of respiration or circulation, and the limbs, although cold, were pliant and flexible. The forehead was furrowed D 2


[100/1290 b21964944_0100.jp2]

36 DOUBTFUL CASES. DEATH-TRAXCE. •with vertical wrinkles, and the countenance had an expression not usually observed in a dead body. On the eighteenth day the lips presented their usual red colour, and, although the body was lying during this time in a warm room, there was no disagreeable odour and no cadaveric ecchymosis. On the twentieth day, the signs of putrefaction first became apparent, leaving then no doubt of the reality of death. As a report of this case was published in a medical journal of repute, although the details are imperfectly given, it may be considered authentic. As such, the conclusion to which it leads has already been anticipated. The ordinary signs of death, i.e., slow cooling and progressive rigidity, were not observed. Further, Avhen the body was exposed to conditions iavoarable to putrefaction, the changes indicative of this process are stated not to have been manifested for a period of twenty days. Such a case Avas altogether exceptional, and was thus treated by the hospital officials. The body was neither inspected nor buried, but simply watched until death was made certain by the actual occurrence of putre- faction. Had this patient fallen into the hands of ignorant nurses or at- tendants instead of professional men, it is probable that the body might have been consigned to the grave in two or three days. Although, as the event subsequently proved, this would not have furnished another instance of the premature interment of a living person, yet the proper course in all doubtful cases is to wait until that doubt has been satisfactorily resolved by the appearance of the obvious signs of decomposition. A case of a somewhat similar nature occurred at Deptford in 1844. A youth died suddenly, and, in consequence of the body shoAving no signs of ' decomposition after several days, it was believed by the friends that the deceased was in a trance. The body was seen by several medical men, and they, in spite of some unusual phenomena, came to the conclusion that the youth was really dead. Some days after death the features acquired a natural character, and there was no change indicative of commencing putrefaction. The body retained its general appearance for tAvtnty-eigkt days; but several medical men who saw it at this period, agreed that decomposition had begun. It Avas not until thirty-five days after death that the friends Avould allow an . inspection to be made, and it was then found that deceased had died from an attack of congestive apoplexy. It Avas observed at the inspection that, in . spite of the long period Avhich liad elap^-'ed since death, and the exposure off the body to a warm temperature, putrefaction had made but little progress.. In October 1849, a youth died at Bristol from an attack of malignant cholera i in about fourteen hours. After the lapse of forty-eight hours, it is stated that the warmth of the body (post-mortem caloricity) was perceptibly retained, and , there was no appearance of decomposition. Some days afterwards, hoAvever,. the process manifested itself as usual. Death-trance.—The slow access of putrefaction in certain cases is no doubt t the ba.sis of the Wallachian superstition, described by the late Dr. H. Mayo ■ under the name of Vampyrism. When bodies were disinterred and hadl apparently undergone but little change, it Avas believed that they were trans-- formed into vampyres, and that they had been nourished and preserved byr sucking the blood of the living J As a mere effect of panic, the prevalence of this popular belief led to numerous deaths : those Avho died Avere hastilyr buried : the bodies of suspected persons Avere disinterred, ana if foundl undecomposed they were either staked or burnt. The late Dr. H. Mayo ina his ' Letters on the Truths contained in popular Superstitions,' has shoAvn thee absurdity of this superstition, but at the same time, he has suggested an explanation of the facts, Avhich can only have the effect of creating alarm in reference to the premature interment of the living. He concludes, ' That the


[101/1290 b21964944_0101.jp2]

REAL AXD APPAREXT DEATH. 3T bodies which -were found in the so-callp.d vampyre state, were simply alive in the common Avay, or had been so for some time subsequently to interment; that, in short, tliey were the bodies of persons Avho had been buried alive, and whose life, where it yet lingered, was finally extinguished through the ignorance and barbarity of those who disinterred them.' But for the writer's high rank as a physiologist, such a statement as this would scarcely require notice. He is here referring to the bodies of persons exhumed after having been buried for periods varying from six to twelve loeeks. The hypothesis that these persons had been alive for some time subsequently to their interment, would render it necessary to suppose that this vitality had continued to Avithin a few days of their exhumation, otherwise it would be equally difficult to account for the absence of signs of putrefaction. Death-trance, hoAvever, according to Dr. li. Mayo, is a positive status; a period of repose, the duration of which I is sometimes definite and predetermined, although unknown. Thus, the term of the death-trance having expired, the patient sometimes suddenly awakes, t and is at once restored. ' The basis of death-trance is suspension of the action of the heart, of breathing, and of voluntary motion : generally likewise of feeling and intelligence; and the vegetative changes in the body are suspended. With these phenomena, is joined loss of external warmth, so that the usual evidence of life is gone ' (p. 34). It is obvious from this statement, that the writer makes no distinction between life and death. All the ordinary phenomena of life may have ceased, and yet. if from any circum- stances the decomposition of the body has been retarded, it may be contended that this person is not dead but simply in a death-trance. Such a startling and incredible hypothesis, is wholly unnecessary to explain the facts. If, as in the cases of retarded putrefaction elsewhere related (page 35), the bodies are buried Avithin twenty-four hours after death, they will probably remain unchanged in the coffins in a deep grave for a very long period. By the act of interment the bodies are removed from the air, and are maintained at a cool and uniform temperature in the earth. In interments which take place during the winter-season, the bodies, cceteiHs paribus, are only slowly changed by putre- faction. This would constitute the vampyre state, or the death-trance as it has been accepted by Dr. H. Mayo : but it is simply regarded as death by all physiologists. The entire absence of the ordinary signs of active life is sufficient, according to this physiologist, to prove the absence of life,—a proposition Avhich may be granted in reference to a feio hours of time; but it would be un- reasonable to adopt his method of inquiiy, and judge of death by the presence of one sign only, instead of taking these signs in their totality and ordinary sequence. Premature interment is a condition Avhich need not be dreaded in this country, Avhere due precautions are taken even with the corpse of an imclainied pauper; and it is to be regretted that otherwise Avell-informed professional men should strive to keep alive a groundless fear in the public mind, by their want of attention to the exceptional conditions to which i experience shows the process of putrefaction is hable. (' Med. Gazette,' vol. 145, p. 21). It may be occasionally difficult to form an opinion of the reality of death in cases of recent droAvning or hanging. Coldness and stiffness of the body in the droAvned, should not prevent the application of means for the restoration of life. One or tAvo hours may elapse before signs of animation appear, and in one instance a droAvned person was restored only after eight hours and a half spent in applying the means of resuscitation. There is reason to believe that some persons removed from Avater in a state of apparent death are consigned to actual death, oAving to Avant of timely application of the means, and a want of perseverance in the treatment. The continued coldness of the body, and the absence of any evidences of success after a fcAV trials, are


[102/1290 b21964944_0102.jp2]

B8 KESTORATIOX OF THE DROWNED. commonly taken as sure signs that the person is really dead. There appears, however, to be, in some cases, a lingering vitality about the body. In an attempt to resuscitate a drowned person who had been five minutes below the water, and was speedily treated after removal, it was observed that the face which had been pale became suddenly livid, and iinderwent a remarkable change of expression. This appearance, however, Avas only momentary : continued efforts failed to restore life. In this form of asphyxia, as well as in hanging and suffocation, some caution is required in pronouncing that a person is really dead, since it at once discourages the efforts of those who are employing means for resuscitation. If the body has been for half an hour or longer under water,—if it has been found hanging or in a suffocating medium and is cold and rigid,—there can be no hope of resuscitation. In new-born children it is sometimes difficult to say whether life has or has not ceased. M. Brachet has succeeded in restoring children, in whom the heart's action had been suspended from fifteen to twenty minutes. Eespiration and circulation are carried on in such a tranquil manner in an apparently lifeless body, that except by the presence of some degree of warmth, and the absence of rigidity, the child might be j^ronounced dead. We have elsewhere recorded cases, in which children have survived birth for six, and even for twenty-four hours in this state of passive life. After death no air was found in the lungs. (See Infanticide.) CHAPTER 3. INFERENCE OF THE TIME OF DEATH FROM THE STATE OF THE BODY BEFOIIE PUTREF.A.CTION PRIORITY OF DEATH PRESUMPTIONS OF SUICIDE OR MURDER— OF SURVIVORSHIP STAGES OF CHANGE AFTER DEATH CADAVERIC LIVIDITY SUGILLATION ECCHYMOSIS. The changes which take place in a dead body before the commencement off putrefaction, if accurately observed, may sometimes enable a medical Avitness s to form an opinion of the time at which the deceased died. The dead body - of a person may be found in a house with marks of murderous violence uponi it; the crime may have been so recently perpetrated, that the body still: retains the warmth and pliancy observed in the recently dead, or it may be found m a cold and rigid state. A person charged with the murder may be able to prove that he had not been in the house for many hours, or days; or- evidence may be adduced to show that he was there at a time which would' correspond to the condition of the body Avhen found. In cases of sudden death from violence or suspected poisoning, a medical man, by observing the state of the body, may frequently form a judgment of the time at which death occurred, and, therefore, of the period at which poison was taken by deceased or violence was inflicted on the body. ' In the following case of murder and suicide, the murderer was clearly pointed out by the difference in the condition of the two dead bodies when they were first discovered. In March 1836, a man and his Avife were found dead in bed and their bodies were covered with blood, from Avounds inflicted on both, in the case of the woman there was a deep incision in the throat, besides a Avound under the chin, and another on the side of the head The man's throat was also severely cut; the razor with which the wounds had been Smu the Sir? r? ^ '''''' -g^^t hand as If, in the last act of life, he had endeavoured to throw the weapon from h m but had failed in the attempt. The body of the woman Avas cold anTr


[103/1290 b21964944_0103.jp2]

39 INFERENCE OF THE TIME OF DEATH. that of the man was warm. The nature and direction of the wounds, and the marks of violence on the woman's person, were such as to render it probable that she had not committed suicide ; and the condition of her body showed that she had been dead many hours. On the other hand, the wound in the man's throat was such, that he could not have long survived its infliction; and as his body, when found, was warm and pliant, it was a reasonable inference that the Avife had died first, and ft-om wounds inflicted by her husband, as no other person had access to the house. If the body of the wife had been found warm, while that of the husband was cold and rigid, the inference of his having been her murderer (the wound in her throat being of a nature to produce instant or very speedy death) could not have been sus- tained. In forming a judgment of priority of death in such cases, the sufficiency of the wound to produce instant or rapid death must always be taken into consideration. A person may inflict on another a slight wound, which may prove fatal by haemorrhage only after some hours, while he may afterwards inflict upon himself a wound which would instantly destroy life. In such a case, the body of a murderer would be found cold, while that of the victim, by reason of the death being more recent, would be warm. In the case of a female who was found dead in her apartment, with her throat cut, in Novem- ber 1847, it was ascertained that, when first discovered, the body was so warm as to render it highly probable that the crime must have been committed within an hour. This observ^ation tended to prove the innocence of a party who Avas suspected of the murder, because it was known that he had been absent from the house for at least five hours. In the following case, which is a type of many, the theory of suicide was sus- tained, and that of homicide completely rebutted, by a medical inference from the condition of the body. In August 1830, the Prince de Conde, or Duke of Bourbon, was found dead in his bedroom, in the Chateau of St. Leu. "When discovered, at 8 o'clock in the morning, the deceased was found partly undressed, hanging by his cravat to one of the window shutters. The body was cold, and the lower extremities were qiiite rigid. As in asphyxia from hanging, the warmth of the body is usually preserved longer than under common circumstances, i. e., fi-om twelve to fifteen hours, before which period rigidity is seldom complete, the medical examiners inferred that the deceased must have died very soon after he had retired to his bedroom on the previous night. As this was proved to have been 10 o'clock, it followed that only ten hours had elapsed—a short time for cooling and rigidity to have taken place. It was thus rendered medically probable that the hanging took place soon after the deceased had entered his bedroom. It was alleged that the duke had been murdered, and his body afterwards suspended by his murderers to create the suspicion of suicide. The condition of the body, among other circum- stances, was, however, adverse to this presumption. From 10 until 12 o'clock at night, it was proved that there were numerous attendants moving about near to the duke's apartments. These persons must have heard any unusual noise, which the duke would probably have made in resisting his assailants. But no noise was heard in the apartment at that or any other time, and the presumption of this being an act of homicide was therefore strongly rebutted. Had the body been found warm and pliant, and the joints flexible, the infe- rence would have been that the deceased had died more recently, and therefore at a time when murder might have been perpetrated without attracting the observation of his attendants. As it was, the coldness and rigidity of the body justified the medical opinion expressed, and tended to prove that this was really an act of suicide. Criminals sometimes unknowingly furnish important evidence in reference to the condition of the dead body. At the Lewes Autumn Assizes, 1860, a


[104/1290 b21964944_0104.jp2]

40 INFERENCE OF THE TIME OF DEATH schoolmaster named TIaplerj was convicted of flogging a pupil to death. There ■was reason to believe that the boy had died during the actual beatnig. ihe accused stated before the coroner that he went into deceased's bedroom abmit Bix o'clock in the morning, and found deceased dead, his body cold, and his arms stiffening. He suggested that he might have died from natural causes. It was proved that the prisoner was heard in the act of beating deceased up to 11.30 on the previous night; and as the body was cold when found, and rigidity was commencing, there was a strong probability that deceased must have been dead at least six or seven hours, and, therefore, at a time when the prisoner was last known to have been with him. The body was well deve- loped, covered with bedclothes, and the temperature not at the time low. In the case of Doidge (Bodmin Aut. Ass. 1862), who was charged with the murder of a man, medical evidence derived from the state of the body when found, tended materially to corroborate the circumstantial evidence against the prisoner. The deceased was last seen alive at 10.30 p.m. on the night of the 7th June 1862. He was found the next morning, about 9.30 a.m., dead in his house; he was lying on his face with his clothes on—one ami under the chest, and the other by his side. He had received, on the back of the head, some severe blows, which must have proved speedily fatal. The body when found was quite cold, and the members Avere rigid. It was considered by Mr. Thompson, who saw the body, and by myself, that deceased, under these circumstances, had been dead from eight to ten hotirs. There Avas no doubt that this was an act of murder, and that the deceased had been killed while taking off his boots to go to bed. The prisoner was connected with the act by a chain of circumstances. He was seen drinking and conversing on friendly terms with deceased at a beer-shop the evening before. Prisoner left the shop at a quarter past ten, and deceased at half-past ten. They both lived near to the shop, and to each other. A neighbour of deceased's, who was out as late as twelve o'clock, heard at that time the voices of tAvo persons in conversation in deceased's kitchen. One of them, he recognized as that of the deceased, and the other as the A'oice of the prisoner, with which he was well acquainted. This Avitness heard the voices for some minutes, retunied into his house, and Avent to bed. He Avas soon afterAvarda suddenly aAvakened by a noise like that of a heavy fall proceeding from deceased's kitchen, in Avhicli the dead body AA'as afterwards found. His evi- dence Avas corroborated by that of his Aviie: hence it is clear that deceased was alive for some time after twelve o'clock that night. It Avas further proved that, contrary to his usual practice, the prisoner did not return home to his lodging until one o'clock in the morning; and then, in order to account for his return at so late an hour, he made a statement Avhich Avas proved to be untrue. The coldness and rigidity of the body, therefore, Avhen discovered at 9.30 A.M., considering the season of the year, and the circumstance that deceased was in his clothes, were facts in themselves quite consistent with i the occurrence of death soon after tAvelve o'clock at night, or about the time Avhen a heavy fall Avas heard by the neighbour. Other circumstances, Avhich Avere proved, left no reasonable doubt of the prisoner's guilt, and he was^ convicted. Perhaps no case has brought the importance of questions of this nature so prominently before the public as that of Gardner, a chimney-sweep, Avho Avas- tried and convicted of the murder of his wife, at the Central Criminal Court,, in October 1862. The prisoner lived with his wife and another Avoman named Humbler.. The Avife was found dead in her bed-room, Avith wounds in her throat, at: eight o'clock in the morning of the 15th September 1862. The nature and', direction of the wounds, the position of the body, and of the weapon, as well!


[105/1290 b21964944_0105.jp2]

IX REFEEEXCE TO THE RECENTLY DEAD BODY. 41 as other circumstances, conclusively proved that this was an act of murder; and as there were no persons in the house at the time of the occurrence excepting the Avoman Humbler (the servant) and the prisoner Gardner, it followed that one or both must have been concerned in the act. Gardner accused the servant. Humbler, of having perpetrated the murder during his absence from home; but as there Avas no evidence against this woman, he alone was subsequently called upon to answer the charge. The facts, as they bear upon the question which we are now considering, are very simple. Mr. Sequeira saw the body of deceased, a healthy, well-developed woman, set. 37, at eight o'clock in the morning. Her body Avas found lying on a wooden floor, covered with a flannel petticoat and a chemise. The upper limbs were cold and rigid; the face, shoulders, and chest were cold; the neck was so rigidly fixed with the trunk, that the entire body was lifted up with it, when the head and neck were raised; the thighs and legs Avere quite cold, but there Avas no rigidity in these parts. The only Avarmth found about the body Avas in the loAver part of the abdomen ; and this obviously arose from the contents of the uterus, the deceased being in the seventh month of pregnancy. The opinion given by INIr. Sequeira regarding the time of death before its exact bearing on the guilt of the prisoner could have been known, Avas that the deceased had been dead above four Jwurs, certainly more than three, and that she could not have been dead so short a time as two or three hours Avhen he first saAv the body. This opinion Avas corroborated at the trial by another medical Avitness, ]\Ir. Comley, this gentleman affirming that, considering the general coldness of the body, the deceased, Avhen seen at eight o'clock, had been dead above, rather than under, foiu- hoiirs. There was a severe Avoimd on the thi-oat, involving the superior thyroideal artery and other vessels. From this, about tAvo pints of blood had flowed on each side of the neck on the floor. The larynx had been laid open between the thyroid and cricoid cartilages. Blood had floAved into the Avindpipe through this aperture, and had thus, by obstructing respiration, produced death by asphyxia. Without going into all those circumstances Avhich tended to fix this crime beyond any reasonable doubt upon the man Gardner, it may be sufficient to state that the defence turned principally upon the condition of the dead body- when found. It Avas proved that from four to eight o'clock in the morning, i. e. for about four hours, the prisoner Avas absent from home, foUoAving his usual occupation as a chimney-sAveep. It Avas contended by his counsel, that within this short period the body might have become cold and rigid as it Avas found, and, therefore, that the murder had been perpetrated by some one during his absence. On this theory the Avoman Humbler alone Avas guilty. The facts proved at the trial were, however, considered by the jury to be quite inconsistent with the innocence of the prisoner, and he Avas convicted of the crime. The subsequent commutation of the sentence to penal servitude for life, is a proof that the authorities considered that he Avas the principal if not the sole perpetrator of this crime. The opinions given by the medical Avitnesses at the trial, regarding the inference derivable from the state of the dead body, Avere reasonable, and in accordance Avith scientific observations. In assigning/b?/r hours for the almost entire cooling and commencement of rigidity in the dead body of a Avoman suddenly dying in the prime of life, the body not being exposed to any specially cooling influences, it is obvious that they could not be charged Avith overstating, but rather Avith understating, the period of time required. Con- sidering that death had taken place by asphyxia, if they had assigned six or eight hours, it would have been only consistent with ordinary experience. It is, indeed, more probable that this time had actually elapsed, and that the woman bad died in from tAvo to four houi's before the male prisoner had lel't


[106/1290 b21964944_0106.jp2]

TIME OF DEATH. CASE OF GAKDXER, 42 the house, than that lier body, under the circumstances proved, had become cold and partially rigid in less than four hours. In the hundred cases observed by Dr. Wilks and myself, there was not an instance in which such rapid cooling and access of rigidity occurred. In Mrs. Gardner's case, it was supposed that the loss of blood would account for this state of the body at so early a period after death; but, in the first place, the deceased did not die from hasmorrhage, but suffocation; and, secondly, a well-marked case else- where related (page 7), shows that the loss of twice as much blood in hajmor- rhage proving suddenly fatal, led to no acceleration of cooling or rigidity in the dead body. Irrelevant experiments on animals, and theoretical speculations of an ex post facto kind, advanced for a particular object after a conviction for murder, should not be allowed to weigh against opinions deliberately formed and expressed by professional eye-witnesses, who, by their evidence on oath, could have had no intention either to exculpate one person, or to inculpate another. As this was clearly a case of murder, and one of two persons must have perpetrated it, the more the charge was removed from the man, against whom there was strong circumstantial evidence, the more com- pletely it was fixed upon the woman Humbler, against Avhom there was nothing but an extemporized medical speculation, that a body dead, as it Avas erroneously assumed, from loss of blood, might become cold and rigid in less than four hours ! Had this medical speculation been adopted as true, and acted on bondfide^ it would have exculpated the man, and have led to the conviction and execution of the woman. It will be easy to show that this speculation, which served its purpose, pro hdc vice, of mystifying the medical features of the case, is wholly opposed to the observations of physiologists, who have really studied the changes which take place in the dead body. As cadaveric rigidity had commenced in the upper part of the body of the deceased when it was first discovered, we may take this as a point of com- parison with the actual observations of Nysten and Brown-Sequard. Accord- ing to Nysten, in cases in which death took place suddenly in healthy persons, either fi-om asphyxia or as a result of hasmorrhage, cadaveric rigidity did not commonly appear until sixteen or eighteen hours after death, and sometimes lasted six or seven days. Brown-Sequard states, that in the bodies of healthy persons decapitated or asphyxiated, cadaveric rigidity did not appear sooner than ten or twelve hours after death (' Proc. Royal Society,' 1861, No. 44, p. 211). Considering these facts, and the circumstances under Avhich this body was found, the assignment of a period of six or eight hours would have been quite within the limits of experience and observation. The medical opinions given at the trial were consistent Avith ordinary experience, and with the other facts proved in the case. The case of Jessie ]\fcPherson, for the murder of Avhom a woman named McLachlan was tried at the Glasgow Autumn Circuit, 1862, fui-nishes an additional proof of the correctness of these vieAvs in reference to the bodies of persons found dead from loss of blood. Dr. G. Macleod saw the body of deceased on the night of July 7, when it was first discovered. The mean temperature of the air on that day had been 50°. ' The rio-or mortis Avas present in all the articulations, but it Avas then departing. Tlie body was perfectly cold, even on the abdomen, and at the flexures of the joints. On the folloAving day, at 10 a.m., the rigidity had gone from all the joints excepting the knees and ankles. There Avere no signs of decomposition and the temperature Avas very cool, unusually so for the season. The room in Avhich the body had lain was well ventilated, but without a draught. It Avas beloAv the level of the street, and the body lay on a Avooden floor' and Avas partially covered. Further, death had resulted from violence • it had t)ecii attejided Avith profuse ha;morrhage, and the victim was free from'disease


[107/1290 b21964944_0107.jp2]

MISTAKES RESPECTING THE TIME OF DEATH. 43 in the prime of life {set. 35), and of a thin, wiry frame.' Dr. Macleod, con- sidering that the rigor mortis commonly appears in from ten hours to three days after death, and that in sudden death from violence it is only slowly developed, thought it most probable that forty-eight hours after death (at the longest) would represent the time when rigidity would appear. ' The more rapidly it is developed, the sooner it disappears, and vice versa. The average period of disappearance is from twenty-four to thirty-six hours. In the case under review, resting on the same considerations as influenced the opinion formed of the time of the establishment of the stiffening, it was thought that about thirty hours would probably represent the period of the con- tinuance of the rigidity; and by summing these periods—forty-eight and thirty—together, the conclusion was arrived at that about thi-ee days had probably intervened since death; and it Avill be remembered that it was afterwards proved that this was, as nearly as could be, the time which had passed between death and the examination of the body.' * Putrefaction appears on an average under a mean temperature in from three to six days. It is influenced by many circumstances, of which the heat and moisture of the surrounding atmosphere, the obesity and age of the person, the cause of death, the po.sition and coverings of the body, are the chief. In the case of McPherson there Avas no appearance of decomposition. The cool atmosphere, thin body drained of its blood, the middle age, and thin covering, all opposed its development' (' Account of the Medical Evidence at the Trial of Jessie McLachlan,' by G. H. Macleod, M.D. Glasgow, 1862, p. 8). This medical opinion formed from the state of the body, tended to confirm that part of the prisoner's story which related to the time of death. On these occasions, unless we have a due regard to all the circumstances of a case, great errors may be committed. We may assign a period for death which is inconsistent with the proved facts, and thus give impunity to nnu-- derers. Ollivier and Devergie were once required to examine a medical report by two physicians, in which they stated that they had found the deceased, a woman, aged sixty, dead in her apartment from strangulation. When the body was found it was lying on the floor, clothed in her usual dress of cotton and flannel, in a state of cadaveric rigidity, with general lividity of the surface of the skin. It was cold, with the exception of a slight warmth which remained in the abdominal viscera when the inspection was made. (' Les visceres renfemies dans la cavit^ abdominale, ne nous parais- sent pas dans un etat de refroidissement complet.') From these data the inspectors came to the conclusion that deceased had not been dead more than from fifteen to twenty hours before the time at which they saw the body. This would have fixed the date of the murderous assault at one o'clock p.m. on March 6, whereas the general evidence tended to show that the crime must have been committed on the night of March 4 or 5. Considering that the deceased had died from asphyxia, in which case warmth is usually retained, that her body was well clothed, and yet rigid and cold, with the exception of a doubtful trace of warmth in the abdo- minal viscera, Ollivier and Devergie came to the conclusion that she must have been dead for a longer period than fifteen or twenty hours ; and, with- out defining the precise time, which, under the circumstances, was not necessary, they affirmed that there was no medical ground on which such a restriction of the period of death was justifiable. They contended that cada- veric rigidity, when once established, might remain two, three, or four days, according to the season of the year and other circumstances ; and that when it existed, there was no rule by which it could be determined whether the body had been in this state for two or three hours or two or three days (' Annales d'Hyg.' 1833, 1, 212). The retention of warmth by the abdominal viscera


[108/1290 b21964944_0108.jp2]

PRESUMPTIONS OF THE TIME OF DEATH 44 may be met Avith after fifteen to twenty hours, in ca mucli more marked degree than in this case. In one case, ah-eady referred to in the table (No. 26) pubHshed in * Guy's Hospital Reports,' the temperature of the viscera of the abdomen, more than seventeen hours after death, was found 1o be 76°, although no care had been taken to preserve the warmth of the body. These changes in the dead body, may occasionally have an important application in reference to civil suits. When two persons are found dead under similar circumstances, a pi-esumption of survivorship might arise in favour of one, by reason of the condition of the body showing a more recent death. A husband and wife, the latter possessing property in her own right, may be found dead in the same apartment; the body of the husband may be cold and rigid, while that of the wife may be warm and pliant. It might in this case bfe presumed that the wife had survived the husband, and the heirs of the wife, if she died intestate, might claim her property. On the other hand, if the body of the wife was found in a state of decomposition, while that of the husband was either cooling or in a state of commencing rigidity, there could be no doubt, medically speaking, that the presumption of sur- vivorship lay with the husband, although no human eye may have wit- nessed the death of either. In this case the few hours' survivorship might be held to transfer the property of the wife to the husband, or through him to the claimants on his part. In these contested cases of presumed survivorship, the litigation between contending parties is often carried to an extreme degree, so that every medical or scientific fact which can be made available, will be brought out on either side. Some French medical jurists have attempted to give a more definite character to these changes in the recently dead body, by dividing the interval between the permanent cessation of the heart's action and the commence- ment of putretaction into three stages or periods. In the first, the warmth and pliancy of the body and muscular irritability remain ; in the second, these conditions are lost, and the body is cold and rigid ; in the third, the body is cold and pliant, the muscles are relaxed, and the joints are flexible, cadaveric rigidity having entirely ceased. A fourth period is marked by the access of putrefaction, in the appearance of one or more well-known signs indicative of chemical decomposition. There can be no doubt about the existence of these stages, but when we attempt to define the precise time at which they commence and succeed each other, the subject is beset Avith great difficulty. Thus, according to Devergie, the first stage ranges over a time Avhich cannot be more closely defined than by stating that the person may have been dead from a few minutes to twenty hours! From the differences observed in different bodies, there Avould be some danger in fixing these times too strictly ; and a medical jurist must be prepared to find that in a question of murder, a counsel Avho defends a prisoner will reject averages, and take, for the purpose of defence, the longest or shortest period of time within which the respective changes have been known to occur. In spite of this objection to medical evidence, it may be convenient to con- sider the subject in reference to the three stages or periods proposed by Devergie. First Period.—This is characterized by the heat of the body beino- more or less preserved, and by a general or partial relaxation of the voluntary muscles. In such a case as this, after attentively considering the various circumstances special to each, Avhich may have retarded or accelerated the cooling of the body, an inference may be draAvn that death has taken place from a. few minutes to twentjj hours. These are the extreme limits, and the time Avill vary according to the degree of heat in the trunk and extremities, and the degree of rigidity in the muscles, as well as the parts of the body


[109/1290 b21964944_0109.jp2]

FROM THE STATE OF THE BODY. 45 affected, the neck and the jaw commonly showing this condition first, and the legs the last. It is rare that the heat of the body is preserved for so long a time as twenty hours; in general it is sensibly cold within ten or twelve, but this estimate will be more or less affected by the condition of the person who makes the observation. During this period, the muscles are susceptible of contraction under the galvanic stimulus, and in the early stage under the mechanical stimulus of blows. Second Period.—In this the body is perfectly cold throughout, and the cadaveric rigidity is well marked. The muscles are no longer susceptible of contracting under galvanic or mechanical stimuli. In such a case death may have occurred from ten hours to three days. It is impossible to give a more definite opinion than this, since there are conditions which may develope rigidity, and under which a body may become cold in ten hours 'or even a shorter period. In one instance already related, a body was found cold and rigid nine hours after death. Again, there are, as we have seen, other con- ditions which may prevent the cooling of the body, and delay the occurrence or prevent the disappearance of rigidity for so long a period as three or even lour days after death. The duration of this stage from ten hours to three days includes the average cases. Here, again, in forming an opinion we are bound to regard the age, the mode of death, and the circumstances under which the body of the deceased may have been exposed. Third Period.—The body is perfectly cold: the members and trunk are pliant, and are quite free from any remains of cadaveric rigidity. As this condition has ceased spontaneously, the muscles no longer contract under the influence of the galvanic stimulus. Under these circumstances it may be assumed that the person has been dead from th'ee to eight days. In the summer season, however, this period is much shorter : it will more commonly be found to be the condition of bodies which have been dead from one to three days. Fourth Period.—This commences with the access of putrefaction. It is first manifested by a slight blueish-green discoloration of the skin of the abdomen, and it gradually spreads throughout the body in the manner else- where described (page 53). Any doubt concerning the reality of death, must cease when the body has reached this stage, at whatever period of time it may manifest itself. Devergie considers this state to represent the condition of the body fi-om six to twelve days afler death, but the fact is well known that putrefaction may manifest itself on the first or second day, and sometimes as late as the twelfth day after death. These different periods are somewhat arbitrarily selected, and they can be looked upon only as affording approxi- mative results. During the heat of summer a body may undergo in twenty- four hours all those changes which Devergie assigns to be a period of from six to twelve days, while in winter the same changes may not be complete in a shorter period than fifteen days. The power of giving a safe medical opinion, must therefore depend on an accurate observation of the state of the dead body when first seen, and a proper estimation of all the causes which influence or modify the successive changes. Notwithstanding the apparent want of precision which medical evidence necessarily presents in investiga- tions relative to the period at which a person died, yet the cases already related, show that approximative results are often of great value. When founded on a correct knowledge of the state of the body, and when they are corroborated by other circumstances, they are received in law with the greatest benefit to the administration of justice. Cadaveric Lividity and Ecchymosis.—There are certain external changes which take place in a dead body before the access of or during putrefaction.


[110/1290 b21964944_0110.jp2]

46 CADAVERIC LIVIDITY. ECCIIYMOSIS. to which it is necessary that a medical jurist should attend. There is what is called cadaveric lividity, which comes on during the act of cooling. _ At a still more advanced period, dark livid spots or patches are met with in the skin, to which the name of sugillation or post-mortem ecchymosis has been given (see 'Henke Zeitschrift der S. A.' vol. 1, p. 199). These appearances have often been mistaken for the effects of violence applied during life, and serious mistakes have thence arisen. Innocent persons have been accused of murder or manslaughter, and have been tried on charges afterwards proved to be groundless. Dr. Christison refers to two cases, in one of which two persons were convicted, and in the other, three narrowly escaped conviction, upon a mistake of this kind. A man named Keir and his mother were .tried on the Aberdeen circuit, for the murder of his father. This case excited great interest at the time, and for many years afterwards. The prisoners were condemned, but the only evidence of any weight against them was the appearance of a broad blue mark on the fore part of the neck, which the witnesses compared to that produced by strangulation. There was, however, great reason to believe, from their own description of it, that it was due to natural changes taking place after death. The other case occurred in Edinburgh. Three men left a public house, intoxicated and quarrelling with each other. On the next morning one of them was found expiring in a wood, and he died soon after he was discovered. Two siirgeons deposed, that they found the marks of numerous contusions all over the body ; and upon this deposition, the two companions of the deceased were committed, and subsequently tried for the murder. On the trial, Messrs. Bell and Fyfe proved to the satisfaction of the Court, that the apparent contusions were nothing else than the livid patches, which sometimes occur spontaneously on the dead body, after many kinds of natural death. Of course, this led to the liberation of the accused parties. These spontaneous changes in the dead body must, therefore, be attended to by the surgeon. They may be considered, by dividing them into those which take place before putrefaction, and those which take place aftenvards. The first form (before putrefaction) is dependent on a stagnation of blood in the capillary vessels. So long as there is life, the capillary circulation continues. This may be ascertained by puncturing the skin or lip with a fine needle ; if the capillary circulation is going on, a drop of blood will escape, otherwise not. When after death the capillaries have lost their con- tractility, the blood appears to stagnate in them in an irregular manner, pro- ducing lividity. The skin of the body, although pale at the time of death, becomes covered during the act of cooling by extensive patches of a blueish or slate colour, diffusing themselves over the greater part of the trunk and limbs. The colour is sometimes of a deep purple, often mottled, but generally abruptly terminating in the white skin. This kind of ecchymosis is chiefly seen on the bodies of those who have died suddenly in full health, or by a violent death, as in apoplexy, hanging, droAvning, suffocation from char- coal vapour, and other causes. In the latter case, it has been found in some instances to be especially developed. It is rarely seen in the bodies of those who have died from haemorrhage; the skin is in these cases commonly pallid. When the skin in which the lividity is seated is divided, it is seen that the colour is confined to the upper layer of the true skin (cutis), or to the space between the cuticle and cutis, and never to extend through the latter. There is no sanguineous effusion, but apparently a simple congestion in the minute capillary vessels. The unruffled state of the cuticle, the great apparent extent of the disco- loration, the fact that it affects many parts of the trunk and members, and often entirely env<ilopes the whole circumference of one or both liinbs,' are.


[111/1290 b21964944_0111.jp2]

47 DOUBTFUL MARKS ON THE DEAD BODT. together witli its abrupt termination, and the absence of extravasated blood in the cellular membrane beneath, circumstances sufficient to distinguish it from the ecchymosis produced by violence. Sometimes this lividity is disposed in a peculiar form over the body. If a stout and muscular person has died suddenly, and the body, Avrapped closely in a sheet, is allowed to cool, the lividity may be sometimes disposed in the form of a number of stripes or bands over the whole surface—the congestion of the vessels taking place in the interstices of the folds, while the parts actually compressed remain white. The appearance of the body is such that we can hardly divest our minds of the idea that the person must have been flogged. The unbroken state of the cuticle, with the other characters just now mentioned, are, however, sxifficient to dis^tinguish this appearance from the effects of violence. This kind of lividity is known under the name of vibices. It is often seen on the backs of subjects that have been allowed to cool either in their clothes or on any rough and uneven surfaces. A few years since I saw a well-marked case of vibices, in which the suspicion was so strong that violence had been used to the deceased, that a coroner's inquest took place. The fore part of the body was covered with stripes, which were of a red and livid colour: they appeared to correspond exactly to the folds of a sheet drawn tightly across the chest; and it was subseqiiently ascertained that the body of the deceased had been treated in this manner after death. The blood was superficially diffiised, and the cuticle uninjured. The circum- stance above mentioned at once satisfactorily explained the cause of the appearance. These vibices or weals, like the cadaveric lividity already described, are commonly seen in plethoric persons; they indicate great vigour of circulation at the moment of death. But lividity in the dead body occa- sionally presents itself under a more deceptive form than in either of the instances just mentioned. This is well shown in the case of a man who died in November 1837, on board of the Dreadnought hospital ship. The subject of this case, set. 33, died suddenly from disease of the heart Just before death the deceased had been auscultated, and no marks then existed on the skin. The body, after about eighteen hours, was examined, and then it was found to present, in detached places, patches of discoloration or ecchymosis, varying in size from small spots to several inches in diameter. Although closely simulating bruises or marks of violence during life, a slight examination showed that they were owing to simple lividity, because those parts of the back and limbs which were not compressed by the surface on which the body of the deceased was lying, were the only parts discoloured. The calves of the legs, the loins, and the back, which bore the pressure, were white. On cutting into these patches, the layers of the skin, as well as the tissues beneath, were throughout reddened by congested blood, and small rounded semi-coagulated masses oozed out from the cellular membrane on slight pressure. These characters somewhat resembled those produced by violence on the living body; but there was another, and, I believe, an unexampled circum- stance, in which the resemblance to vital ecchymosis, existed. Around many of the patches there was a wide border, or zone, of a pale straw colour, Avith various shades of green and blue, precisely similar to those which are seen in the gradual disappearance of an ecchymosis ft-om the living body. By most medical jurists it has been hitherto considered that the zones of colour are peculiar to vital ecchymosis, and are never seen in the ecchymosis produced after death. The occurrence of this case shoAvs with what caution general rules should be framed for medico-legal practice. Had the body of this person been found lying dead and exposed on a high road, and had it been proved that another man had been seen quarrelling with him, what might


[112/1290 b21964944_0112.jp2]

48 MARKS RESEMBLIXG THE EFFECTS OF VIOLENCE. have been the opinion expressed ? We can scarcely hesitate to say, unfavour- able to the accused person. This kind of ecchymosis could have been distinguished from that of violence during life only by the unruffled state of the skin, and the slight effusion of blood, compared with the extent of discoloured surface. It is worthy of note, also, that the chief seat of ecchymosis, was in those parts which were recumbent or depending. The formation of the coloured zones around some of the patches of lividity Avas fully explained by the fact of the man having laboured under general dropsy. The serum effused in the cells, here acted upon and diluted the liquid blood, as it exuded from the vessels and diffused it around, much in the same manner as the serous exhalation of the cellular membrane acts on the blood effused in the living body. A question, connected with lividity, or cadaveric ecchymosis, was raised on the trial of lieid (p. 27), namely:—Whether this cadaveric lividity always iweceded cadaveric rigidity or not ? Kigidity is not in general strongly manifested until the body is cold; the lividity here described takes place while the body is cooling and the blood is liquid. The occurrence of rigidity depends on the time at which muscular irritability is entirely lost: but post- mortem discoloration of the skin is closely connected Avith the presence of warmth in the body, and with fluidity of the blood; hence cadaveric lividity begins to develope itself often soon afler death, and continues to increase until the body is cold, when its formation is entirely arrested. It appears to consist simply in a congestion of the capillary vessels, and is produced before the coagulation of the blood in the first stage or period after death. As it has now been clearly proved that rigidity affects the heart and coats of the arteries before rigidity of the voluntary muscles manifests itself, it ia highly probable that in the contraction of these tubes, the blood is forced at first through the capillaries into the venous system, and afterwards, from Avant of sufficient power of propulsion, it stagnates unequally in these vessels, producing livid patches on the skin : although the arteries are relaxed and become quite flaccid, the blood remains in the minvite vessels in Avhich it has collected. Another form of ecchymosis observed in the dead body, is that which occurs some time after death. This appears to proceed from an infiltration of blood into the depending parts of the body, and to be a result of incipient putrefaction. They Avho are much engaged in inspections are Avell aAvare that the skin of the back, especially that covering the loins and buttocks, often presents iixegular discolorations resembling ecchymosis. The skin of the back of the head and nape of the neck is a Avell-knoAvn seat of this form of ecchymosis. On cutting into the skin of any of these parts, it is found to be more or less discoloured throughout, and the fatty tissue is filled with a bloody serum, Avhich readily escapes. In proportion as putrefaction advances, the discoloration becomes greater, passing from a dark red to a green colour. The general characters of this kind of ecchymosis are so Avell marked, that it cannot easily be confounded Avith the ecchymosis of violence. The parts of the body in which it is known to occur, as well as the state of the body, are circumstances which distinguish it from all the other forms described. This variety of ecchymosis is also termed sugillation by some medical jurists. (On the subject of Ecchymosis, see 'Ann. d'Hyg.' 1838, t, 2, p. 383.)


[113/1290 b21964944_0113.jp2]

SIGNS OF DEATH. PUTREFACTIOX. 49 CHAPTER 4. PUTREFACTION ITS NATURE AND PROGRESS—PRODUCTION OF GASES—POST-MORTEM H.EMORRHAGE PRESSURE ON THE VISCERA NATURE OF THE GASES OF PUTRE- FACTION CHANGES IN THE COLOUR OF THE SKIN AND OTHER ORGANS PUTREFACTION IN AIR CONDITIONS FOR THE PROCESS CIRCUMSTANCES WHICH MODIFY IT INFLUENCE OF DISEASE AND CERTAIN POISONS PUTREFACTION IN BODIES BURIED IN GRAVES—PRODUCTION OF ADIPOCERE ITS CHEMICAL NATURE. Putrefaction.—By putrefaction, we are to understand those chemical changes whicli spontaneously take place in dead animal matter, during which offensive gases are evolved. The ultimate effect of these changes is, after a longer or shorter period, to reduce the organic to the condition of inorganic compounds consisting chiefly of water, ammonia, and carbonic acid. It is in the stage of transition that noxious effluvia are evolved from Avhich the process derives its name. Tliese consist of compounds of nitrogen, sulphur, phosphorus, and carbon with hydrogen. This process does not begin to manifest itself in the dead body until after the cessation of cadaveric rigidity, and generally about the third day. It is then observed, if the body has been exposed to the atmosphere in an apart- ment of mean temperature (00°), that the limbs and trunk become supple and pliant, and yield a faint odour. The skin covering the abdomen becomes of a pale green colour, which gradually dee^iens. A similar discoloration slowly makes its appearance in the chest, between the ribs, in the face, the neck, the legs, and lastly, in the arms. The colour appears to depend on the decompo- sition and infiltration of the animal fluids, especially the blood, into the skin. In tlie neck and limbs it is observed to be more marked in the situation of the large venous trunks; and sometimes, indeed, the course of the superficial veins is accurately traced out by greenish-blue or dark lines; these have been mistaken for marks of violence. This change in the colour of the blood infiltrated into the tissues is probably owing to the action of ammonia as a result of decomposition, on the red colouring matter. In a more advanced state we have found the blood to contain sulphuretted hydrogen as well as ammonia in the form of sulphide of ammonium and carbonate of ammonia. Its colour is then dark brown, almo.st black, and it effervesces strongly when an acid is added to it. Gaseous products are formed, not only in the hollow organs of the abdomen, but beneath the skin generally ; so that on making an incision, the edges of the skin are rapidly forced apart or everted. The reaction of this confined gas accounts for the occasional escape of alimentary and faecal matter from the outlets :—an also for the escape of blood some days after death from Avounds involving any of the large veins. This post-mortem hcemorrhage requires one or two remarks. Its occur- rence formerly gave rise to the most superstitious notions, and even in the present day, an undue importance may be attached to it by a coroner's jury. In order to explain this, and some other apparently vital phenomena connected with a dead body, it will be necessary to refer to those spontaneous changes which commence soon after death. When a person has died suddenly from violence or convulsive disease, it may happen that within a short period the whole of the cavities, including the veins, arteries, and cellular tissue beneath the skin, become distended with gases derived from putrefaction. The gases collected in the abdomen, push back the diaphragm, in consequence of which, mucus with air-bubbles issues from the mouth and nostrils ; the face is swollen, and the eyes are bright and prominent, owing to the blood having been forced back to the head and neck, by the distended state of the abdomen and viscera. For a similar reason the contents of the stomach are


[114/1290 b21964944_0114.jp2]

50 ESCAPE OF BLOOD FROM THE DEAD BODY. sometimes discharged, escapinp; into the trachea, or flowing externally hy the mouth and nostiils. That which, however, more immediately concerns us at the present time, is the development of these gases within the heart and laro-e blood-vessels, in consequence of which blood may be forced out of a wound made before death, long after all the phenomena of life have entirely ceased. If an attempt has been made to bleed a person inunediately before death, without success, and the operator has neglected to secure the opening in the vessel, it may happen that, some hours after death, a large quantity of blood will escape by the wound—conveying to those, who are uninformed on these matters, the idea that the person liad again come to life, but had died from the bleeding. An accident of this kind gave rise to considerable discussion, on the occasion of an inquest held at Oldham, on the body John Lees, killed in the Manchester riots, as also in the case of the Crown Prince of Sweden, who was suspected to have been poisoned. A similar floAV of blood may take place from a large incised Avound, made recently before death. This post-mortem haemorrhage is iacilitated by pressure, and on this was based that ancient test of guilt; viz. the touch of the murderer. When there is no open wound from which blood can escape, the cavities of the heart may suffer compression from gases generated within the chest and abdomen, and a portion of the blood may be thus forced out of them. If full at the time of death, and the body is examined within a week, it is not pro- bable that the cavities would be completely emptied. If the heart is found empty, and at the same time contracted, its emptiness cannot be assigned to the effects of putrefaction ; it was most probably the natural condition of the organ at the time of death. A collapsed and empty conditien of the lungs has been ascribed to pressure from the gases of putrefaction, the medical assumption being that they had contained air and blood at the time of death. This is not in accordance with my observation. In advanced putrefaction these organs have also contained gaseous matter and dark-coloured liquid blood. In examining putrefied bodies in cases in which death has been alleged to have been caused by some form of asphyxia, i.e. strangulation or suffocation, it will be important for the medical witness to bear in mind these conditions of the heart and lungs. They may be found empty and collapsed ; in such a case, he must not be too ready to assume, in order to reconcile this condition with the foregone conclusion of a violent cause of death, that they Avere full of blood or congested at the time of death, and that their emptiness is owing to post-mortem changes. It may be equally probable that they Avere empty Avhen the person died, for emptiness of the heart and a collapsed state of the lungs, are frequently found in bodies Avhich are not putrefied: hence the medical opinion in a given case can be only an inference or surmise. Orfila has observed blood in the cavities of the heart as Avell as in the lungs of exhumed bodies Avhich had been for some time buried, the organs having a blueish slate colour (' Medecine Legale,' 4 ed. 1, 642). The gases generated in the cavities of the head and face by putrefaction, appear to meet Avith the greatest resistance to their escape. The features become generally SAVollen or bloated, one or both eyes may be protruded, the eyelids SAvoUen and dark-coloured, the lips swollen and the tongue protruded betAveen them, gaseous matter Avith fluid escaping in bubbles from the mouth and nostrils. As the skin of the face is generally livid or even black, it is impos- sible, under these circumstances, to recognize a person. In death from droAvnino-, when the body is afterAvards exposed to a Avarm atmosphere, the gases of putrefaction are so copiously produced, that the head appears much larger than natural, and the skin of the trunk and limbs is distended Avith gas, o-ivino- to the whole of the discoloured body a bloated appearance. & ' o o Gases of Putrefaction.—The gases produced in the dead body are in the


[115/1290 b21964944_0115.jp2]

GASES OF PUTREFACTION. THEIR EFFECTS. 51 early stages chiefly ammonia and sulphuretted hydrogen, and at a later period carbonic acid, carbonate of ammonia, nitrogen, carburetted hydrogen, and phosphuretted hydrogen. The nature and quantity of tliese gases depend more on the degi-ee of putrefaction than on the time which has elapsed since death. The sul]jhuretted hydrogen may be detected by paper moistened with a solution of acetate of lead; the phosphuretted hydrogen, by ])aper impreg- nated with nitrate of silver; ammonia, by the vapour of hydrocliloric acid, or red litnuis paper ; and the carburetted hydrogen, by its combustibility and by the products of its condjustion. It will generally be found that the sulphuretted liydrogen is combined with ammonia, since paper impregnated with a solution of nitroprusside of sodium acquires a crimson colour when held in a jar con- taining the decomposed viscera. Other gases and vapours, of which chemistry can at present render no accoiuit, are also present. On some occasions the exhalations have been of a most offensive and nauseous character, and the tests have not indicated the presence of either sulphuretted or phosphuretted hydrogen. Dr. W. Lewis examined and reported on the external condition and appear- ance of 22,000 coffins accumulated in the vaults of London chui-ches. He examined the state of the contents of about one hundred of these. The expe- riments were made on the bodies of persons of all ages, and on coffins which had been deposited for a short period or for upwards of a centiuy. He did not find therein sulphuretted, phosphuretted, or carburetted hydrogen, or any compound of cyanogen. The gases which he uniformly detected in the coffins and the vaults were nitrogen, carbonic acid, and atmospheric air holding decomposing animal matter in suspension. Ammonia was occasionally found in large quantities ; this, when present, overcame all other odours. When absent, the animal matter had a smell resembling that of putrid moist cheese. He opened one leaden coffin, in which the corpse had been enclosed for nearly a century; the ammoniacal gas which escaped from it formed dense white fames when brought into contact with hydrochloric acid gas. It was so ])owcrl'ul tliat the head could not remain near it for more than a few seconds at a time ('Amer. Jour. Med. Sc.' Jan. 1852, p. 275). I have noticed the same results in reference to a body which was exhumed after six months' interment. When the coffin lid was removed by the side of the grave, a large quantity of foetid ammonia escaped. On throAving into the coffin some chloride of lime, dense white clouds of the hydrochlorate of ammonia were evolved from the interior of the coffin, to the great alarm of some of the bystanders, who were not aware of the chemical changes produced. It would appear that the air enclosed in coffins is in general completely deoxidized. When tested it was not inflammable, but was found in every instance to extinguish flame. In leaden coffins putrefaction is so much retarded, that the remains of bodies were found after the lapse of a century. The metal is slowly corroded and changed into carbonate of lead, Chavges in the Viscera.—During these changes in the dead body, various discolorations take place on the mucous surface of the stomach and bowels, which often closely simulate the effects of disease or poison. The mucous membrane of the stomach may be found of various tints—from a red brown, becoming of a brighter red by exposure to the air, to a deep livid purple or slate colour, and sometimes black from a decomposition of the blood. At the greater end, where the stomach is in contact Avith the spleen or liver, the lividity is oflen well marked and clearly defined througli all the coats. The peritoneal or outer coat is of a greenish hue, and the course of the superficial vessels is marked by greenish-brown or black lines. These spontaneous changes, which are the result of putrefaction, may be easily mistaken for the effects of irritant poisoning. There arc no rules that I am aware of,


[116/1290 b21964944_0116.jp2]

52 CHANGES RESEMBLING THE EFFECTS OF POISONING. Avhich Avill always enable a medical jurist to distinguish such cases. IMuch must depend on the progress of putrefaction, and the period after death at Avhich the body is examined : hence, each case must be judged by the circumstances which attend it. We may presume that the red- ness has taken i)lacc during life, and is not a result of post-mortem changes. I. When it is seen soon after death. 2. .When it is met with in parts not dependent, nor in contact with other organs gorged with blood. 3. When it is accompanied by a considerable effusion of coagulated blood, mucus or flakes of membrane, the result of ulceration, cori-osion, or destruc- tion of the coats of the viscera. When the body is not inspected until a long period after death, it is difficult to distinguish these pseudo-mor- bid appearances from those depending on the action of irritant poison. In a really doubtful case it is, therefore, better to withhold an opinion, than to express one which must be purely conjectural. It is impossible to assign a definite period at which the effects pi-oduced by irritants are destroyed by the process of putrefaction. If the poison were of an antiseptic character, and the body had been speedily buried, a decided redness of the stomach, as a result of inflammation, may be perceived after five or six weeks. On one occasion I Avas able to distinguish the effects of arsenic on the mucous membrane of the stomach in the case of a child whose body had been interred for a period of twenty-eight days; and in other cases in which the viscera were well preserved, after a year and nineteen months. Of course, when the inflammation is only slight, it will be much more speedily obliterated, or mergo in the redness caused by decomposition. The effects of gravitation in leading to a discoloration of the stomach and bowels in the recently-dead body, must not be overlooked. The experi- ments of MM. Trousseau and Rigot have determined, that the simple effects of gravitation will produce a livid or even a red appearance of all the depen- dent portions of the intestines. This cadaveric congestion, as it may be termed, has been long knoAvn to exist in the lungs; but it does not appear to have atti-acted sufficiently the attention of pathologists, in respect to the stomach and intestines. It has been especially remarked by Andral and others, in the small intestines, particularly in those portions found Avithin the cavity of the pelvis; and this last-mentioned pathologist noticed, that in a body placed Avith the face doAvuAvards soon after death, the anterior Avail of the stomach became strongly reddened. As this effect of gravitation ceases, so soon as the blood coagulates by the cooling of the body, so does it follow that Avhen the body has been a long time in cooling, it Avill be much more strongly marked. The mucous membrane of the stomach and upper part of the small intes- tines often presents, during putrefaction, a yelloAvish or gi-een tinge, depend- ing on the transudation of the bile, or the colouring matter of the fajces contained in the colon. This must not be mistaken for the appearance of poisoning by the mineral acids. There is, in these cases, no softening or cor- rosion, and the throat and gullet are not implicated, as they are in this form of poisoning. So, again, melanosis in the stomach—i. e. a deposit of black colouring matter beneath the mucous coat, might be mistaken for the effect of sulphuric or oxalic acid or caustic alkalies; but melanosis is unaccom- panied by any marks of inflammation or corrosion in the mucous membrane beneath, and it is always seen in Avell-defined spots. Among the external changes produced by incipient putrefaction, a change of colour in the skin covering the abdomen, has been already noticed (p.'45). It slowly acquires a pale, green hue, gradually deepening and extendino- to the skin of the chest and limbs. This colour has been regarded, by°M. Deschamps, as a most certain sign of death, and one better fitted than any


[117/1290 b21964944_0117.jp2]

53 rUTREFACTION IN AIR. PHOSPHORESCENCE. othei' to guide us in determining the reality of death. This sign, however, is not available, under common circumstances, imtil three days after death, and it is scarcely possible that a well-informed practitioner should require to wait so long a time before expressing an opinion. Deschamps has laid down the following rules respecting this green colour acquired by the skin of the abdomen :—1. A greenish-blue coloiu", extending uniformly over the skin of the belly, is the only real and certain sign of death. 2. The period at which this sign appears after death, varies much; but it conmionly takes place in about three da>/s, under favourable conditions of warmth and moisture. 3. Although discoloi'ation of various kinds and Irom various cavises, may occur in other parts of the body, this characteristic mark of death is always to be found in the abdomen. 4. Apparent death can no longer be confounded with real death, the abdomen never becoming coloured green or blue in any case in which death is only apparent. 5. This colouring of the abdomen, the ap- pearance of which may be artificially hastened by exposing the body to a warm temperature, will, if observed, entirely prevent the possibility of prema- ture interment. 6. There is no danger to public health from keeping a body until the appearance of this chai'acteristic sign of death. There are some facts connected Avith the progress of putrefaction as it takes place in the atmosphere, in the earth, or under water, which are of interest to a medical jurist. 1. Putrefaction in Air.—Putrefaction cannot take place in the living body ; it is in resisting the access of this process, that the power of life or vital force is chiefly manifested. Some have conceived that putrefaction might begin under a diminished state of vitality, as when a person is about to perish fi-om a slow and wasting disease: they have thus explained the peculiar odour perceptible in the breath and perspiration of many dying individuals, some hours previous to dissolution. But it is probable that these exhalations are themselves of a morbid nature : at any rate, it is certain that so long as life remains in the body, no phenomena resembling those of ordinary putrefaction in the dead body are observable. It is unnecessary to make any remark in this place relative to local gangrene ; since, although this may take place in a living body, it is only observed in a part already deprived of life, and does not involve the whole of the body. It is molecular or partial death. In some cases, before dissolution, the breath has been observed to be luminous : this has been ascribed to the evolution of phosphorus, which is said to have been distinctly recognized by its peculiar odour. It would appear also, fi-om good authority, that the countenance of a dying person has, on more than one occasion, become distinctly luminous or phosphorescent in the dark. The cause of this phenomenon is unknown, and, so far as I am aware, it has been only in advanced cases of consumption or wasting disease, that this evolution of light from the countenance shortly before death, has been observed (see cases by Sir H. Marsh, ' Edinburgh Med. Journal,' vol. 58, p. 497 ; and by Drs. Donovan and Stokes, 'Dublin Med. Press,' January 15, 1840), Dr. H. M'Cormack has reported the case of a child, aged sixteen months, suffer- ing from dentition, in which the skin of the hips was observed to be luminous. There was no odour of phosphorus, and no application Avhich could account for it, had been m ade to the skin ('Ed, Med. Jour.' vol. 66, p. 285), But the dead human body may become luminous under incipient decomposition. A re- markable case of t]uf?kind occurred in 1823-4, in the dissecting-room of the Webb Street School of Anatomy. The greater part of a dead body Avhich had been dissected appeared luminous or phosphorescent in the dark. The cause of this evolution of light in the dying and dead, is not Avell ascertained : in the dying it may possibly be owing to certain chemical changes analogous to


[118/1290 b21964944_0118.jp2]

54 COXDITIOXS FOR THE TROCESS OF PUTREFACTION. decomposition, commencing during life; while, in the dead, it may be due to the production of himinous matter of a phosphorescent nature. It is well known that certain kinds of dead fish and decayed wood become luminous in the dark. These singular facts, which have only been observed of late years, will account for many of the superstitions which formerly existed. The time after death at which putrefaction commences, may vary from a few hours to many days and even weeks. It never begins imtil cadaveric rigidity has ceased, and therefore not until the muscles of the body have entirely lost their irritability. Whatever conditions of the body during life or after death may operate to cause the disappearance of muscular irritability, VfiW 2)(tri passu accelerate rigidity and putreiiiction, and vice versa. There are three primary conditions which are indispensable to the establishment of this process in a dead body. These are: 1st, a certain temperature ; 2nd, the presence of moisture ; and 3rd, the free access of air. There are many other conditions of a secondary kind which may retard or accelerate its com- mencement, and, wlien established, may affect its progi-ess and duration. These will be considered in their order. Temperature.—The process is found to go on most favourably in a temperatiu-e varying from 70° to 100°. It will commence, other circum- stances concurring, at any temperature above 50° ; but at 32° it appears to be Avholly arrested. The dead body may thus be preserved a considerable time in snow, ice, or in a frozen soil; but if, after removal, it is exposed to a tem- perature between 70° and 100°, the ordinary putrefactive changes are stated to take place with more than their usual rapidity. Adolph Erman staters that the body of Prince Menchikof, one of the favourites of Peter I., was exhumed at Beresov, in 1821, after a burial of ninety-two years in the frozen soil of Siberia. Althougli so long a time had elapsed, the body had under- gone but little change. The heai-t and some other parts, with a portion of the grave-clothes, were removed and sent to the descendants of the deceased (' Travels in Siberia,' vol. 1, p. 4G2). But a still more remarkable instance of the preservative or antiseptic power of cold, is exhibited in the discovery of the body of an ancient elephant {e/ephas primi;jen{us) in a mass of ice at the mo;ith of the River Lena in Siberia in 1805 (' Quart. Journ. of Science,' vol. 8, p. 95). Some years since I saw a portion of the dried skin and long hair of this animal, the race of which was extinct before the historical! period. A low temperature is said to arrest putrefixction by congealing the mois- tiu-e within the animal body; but this explanation is not of itself sufficient, since a body at 33°, has no more tendency to putrefy than one at or below 32°. The true reason seems to be, that heat is essential to the combination of the gaseous elements of the body during putrefaction, as well as to the existence of the gaseous products resulting from their union. At a high temperature, again, i. e. about 212°, putrefaction is arrested. The soft animal solids lose their water, become hard and brittle masses, and may now be exposed to the atmosphere without undergoing any further change. A heat be- tween 100° and 212° may also speedily put a stop to the process, by causin a rapid evaporation of the water contained within the solids. They becoiip thereby dried and coagulated. Tims it is that bodies buried in the hot aivl arid sands of Egypt are dug up, many years after interment, in the stiit of desiccated munuuies, putrefactive decomposition having been Ion"- siiic^ arrested. The effect of temperature on this process is strikingly seen in xW influence of season. A dead body exposed to air during shimmer wlim the thermometer is above 60° or 70°, may undergo more marked'putri- factive changes in twenty-four hours, than a similar body exposed for a week or ten days in winter. This is a fact which demands consideration' when


[119/1290 b21964944_0119.jp2]

INFLUENCE OP HEAT, MOISTURE, AND AIR. 55 an opinion is required to be formed, respecting the date of death of a body concerning Avhich nothing is known. Light has not been found to have any influence over the process. The Presence of Moisture.—Unless the animal substance is impregnated with water or moisture, it is impossible that putrefaction can take place. The animal solids conmionly contain suflicient water for the spontaneous establishment of the process. In a human body weighing 150 lbs., there arc about 100 lbs. of water (' Brande and Taylor's Chemistry,' p. 831). The soft organs dilfer much from each other in respect to the quantity of liquid contained in them, and therefore in tlie degree in Avhich they are prone to putrefaction. Thus the brain and the eye are in this respect contrasted with the teeth, bones, hair, and nails. The fluids of the eye are rapidly decom- posed, while the teeth and hair may remain for centuries unchanged. The late ]\[r. Quckett examined a portion of dried human skin with hair upon it, which had been exposed for many centuries on a door of Worcester Cathedral, and also other portions taken from the church doors of Hadstock and Copford in Essex. He found upon them soxiie hairs, which Avere proved by the mi- croscope to be human, thus confirming the old tradition that the skins of ])crsons who had committed sacrilege were nailed to the doors of the churches which they had robbed (' Edinburgh Monthly Journal,' July 1848, p. 63). If the organic sulxstance be deprived of its water by any means, putre- faction is an-ested. Goy-Lusstic found that flesh might be preserved for a considerable peiuod, simply by suspending it under a bell-glass, placed in a dish of fused chloride of calcium. Albumen and gelatine, deprived of Avater, by chloride of calcium, have been kept in a dry state for a period of twenty years, during Avhich time they have been exposed to air and a favour- able temperature, without undergoing putrefaction. An excess of water, how- ever, tends to retard and modify the process : thus, by allowing a current of Avater to fall on animal matter, it may be preserved for a length of time. Water appears to act in putrefaction as it does in numerous other chemical processes, hy its dissolving power. It brings the minute atoms of organic matter Avithin the sphere of their mutual attraction. In excess it seems to retard putrefaction by merely cutting off the access of air. By long ccntact it produces an alteration in the soil solids, converting them into a Avhite substance. Influence of Air.—Putrefaction may take place to a slight extent in- dependently of air, but the process is soon arrested ; and thus bodies sealed permanently in leaden coffins, may be found perfect and identified after very long periods of time. The products in all cases in which air is excluded, are chiefly of an ammoniacal nature. Air operates by its free oxygen combining Avith the animal elements, and forming gaseous and liquid products. The only limit to this process of decomposition under a free supply of oxygen, is the loss of Avater by evapora- tion. Nitrogen, the other element of air; has no influence ; it appears to be decidedly antiseptic, so that flesh may be preserved in it for a very long period Avithout " change, although heat and moisture are present. Orfila states that it is OAving to this circumstance that the bodies of infiuits, exposed to the soil and atmosphere of privies, are sometimes sIoav in putrefying, nitrogen being a predominant element in the air of these localities. ^ In gaseous mixtures it is necessary to putrefaction that the oxygen should be free as in the atmosphere, and not chemically united to any other element. Thus carbonic acid and the deutoxide of nitrogen, especially the latter, since it Avill not admit of the approach of free oxygen, act as most powerful anti- septics. In a series of experiments on the properties of these gases in retarding putrefaction, I found iu one that a large piece of fi-esh muscle Avas


[120/1290 b21964944_0120.jp2]

56 rUTKEFACTION IN AIR. MODIFYim CONDITIONS. preserved effectually in a bell-glass of deutoxide of nitrogen, over water, for eighteen weeks; in a second experiment, for nineteen weeks; in a third, per- formed in 1842, for a period of thirty-two weeks, or 224 days; and in a fourth, for a period of seventeen months. The last experiment was com- menced on October 27, 1862, and at the present period (March 1864) the muscle suspended in the gas retains its colour after eighteen months, and has undergone no change indicative of putrefaction. These experiments have been carried on under all variations of temperature, in a room not below 40° in the winter season, but which sometimes reached 80° in summer. As the vessel containing the gas was placed over water, the gas was of course always saturated with aqueous vapour, Two of the conditions for putrefaction were therefore present. Air only was removed. In some parallel experiments with air and oxygen, putrefaction had gone on to a full extent in eight or ten days. These facts show that oxygen in a free state, is eminently necessary for the destruction of the soft parts of the body by putrefaction. The influence of the atmosphere is not merely confined to its affording oxygen. It modifies putrefaction, according to its dry or humid condition, and according to its state of rest or motion. Dry air retards putrefaction, since evaporation is increased. Plumid air accelerates the process, by giving rise to an opposite effect. Air in motion, as a brisk wind, retards the process, since, cceteris paribus^ evaporation is greater. Air at rest, as the calm still atmosphere of a close apartment, is, on the other hand, favourable to the process. On the whole it may be inferred that the conditions most favourable to the putrefaction of the dead body, are a temperature of about 70° in a humid and tranquil atmosphere. It has been observed that when putrefaction has once begun in a part of the body, it has rapidly extended itself throughout the whole. It seems as if the first products acted as a kind of ferment, to induce chemical changes throughout the mass. Modifying Conditions.—There are many circumstances which modify the progress and duration of this process, to the chief of which it will be proper to direct our attention : — 1. Acjc.—The bodies of infants and aged persons, all other circumstances being equal, decompose more readily than those of adults. In regard to infants, this is important to remember, as in a case of inlanticide, a medical Avitness may be required to state the time at which the death of the child probably took place. 2. Sex.—The bodies of females are said to putrefy more readily than those of males. The cause of this difference is not by any means apparent, and probably it is inconsiderable. 3. Peculiaritij of Constitution. — Difficult as it may be to understand how constitutional peculiarity can influence the putrefactive process after death it nevertheless appears to be well established that such an influence is exerted. In persons of the same age and sex, dying of the same disease and exposed in the same apartment, or interred in the same soil, putrefaction will be found to advance with different degrees of rapidity. The cause probably rests upon differences in the condition of the fluids and solids of the body, which cannot be detected by the ordinary processes of chemical analysis. 4. State of the Bodi/.—Fnt and flabby bodies are observed to undercro putrefaction more readily than those which are thin and emaciated. This probably depends on the greater quantity of blood contained in them.' Con- nected with the state of the body, we may also mention the influence Avhich wounds or bruises, or mutilations of any kind, have over this process Those parts wliich at the time of death are affected by contused or incised wounds


[121/1290 b21964944_0121.jp2]

57 INFLUENCE OF DISEASE AND FOISONS. ecchymosis or extravasation, rapidly pass into a state of putrefaction. Thus, in examining bodies which have been subjected to violence during life, con- tusions and ecchymoses may appear gi*eatly aggravated, vmless the examiner be aware that such parts become more speedily decomposed. 5. Influence of Disease.—The bodies of persons who have died from acute diseases, have been observed to putrefy more readily than those of persons Avho have died from wasting and chronic disease. In the numerous examina- tions of the dead made annually at Guy's Hospital, Dr. Wilks has observed as a rule, that the bodies of those who have been long ill, and are emaci- ated, remain unchanged for a longer time than those who have died from acute disease (' Guy's Hospital Reports,' October 1863). It would appear as if some kinds of disease had either directly or indirectly a retarding influence over this process. It has been also remarked that the bodies of plethoric persons who have died suddenly while in good health, olten undergo rapid decomposition. In persons who have died from asphyxia, as by drown- ing, suffocation, or strangulation, the bodies are, cceteris paribus, observed to putrefy with great rapidity ; and as a general rule all those parts of the body which at the time of death are irritated, congested, or inflamed, are rapidly attacked by the putrefactive process. G. Influence of certain Poisons.—The most contradictory statements have been made regarding the process of putrefaction in the bodies of those who have died from certain poisons. Thus it has been stated that in death from prussic acid, morphia and vegetable poisons, putrefaction gene- rally commences early and progresses with rapidity, while strychnia has been supposed to exercise a retarding power. In poisoning by vegetable narcotico-irritants the blood is observed to be frequently dark-coloured and very liquid, and it may therefore have iindergone some chemical change, which may render it more prone to decomposition. But the obser- vations elsewhere made (p. 17) will at once account for the conflicting statements, and show that putrefaction may be accelerated or retarded under the influence of the same poison, according to the mode in which it operates on the muscular system at the time of death. Thus when strychnia destroys life rapidly, without exhausting the muscular irritability l)y frequent convulsive fits, putrefaction takes place slowly; but if all muscular irritability is destroyed before death, it speedily supervenes, and runs through its stages rapidly. As a general rule putrefaction is not set up in a body so long as cadaveric rigidity remains in the muscles. When this condition comes on late, and lasts for a long time, it is slow in appearing, whatever may be the nature of the poison : under opposite circumst;inces putrefixction takes place rapidly, provided the circumstances are favourable. In a death from nicotina in which all muscular irritability appeared to be destroyed, putrefaction commenced early and in a few hours had made great progress. The body was bloated, and the skin tense and much discoloured. Some poisons, by chemically combining with animal matter, appear to confer on it the power of resisting putrefliction, at least to a very great degree. This is now a well-known property of arsenic; and in the arts, this poison is largely employed as an antiseptic. When a solution of it is injected into the arteries of a dead body, it tends to preserve it for a long time from putrefac- tion. In examining the bodies of persons poisoned by arsenic, after an interment of six, twelve, and twenty-four months, I have found the stomach and bowels remarkably preserved ; and the liver, spleen, and heart also preserved, but in a less perfect mannei-. The presei-vative effects are occa- sionally such that I have seen the pathological, changes in the raucous membrane, Avell marked after tlie body had been nearly two years in the grave. At the same time, it must be admitted that this preservative property


[122/1290 b21964944_0122.jp2]

ACCELERATORS OF rUTREFACTIOiX. 58 is not manifested in all cases; hence Ave must not fall into the error of affirming that the person has not died from the effects of arsenic, because the viscera are much putrefied. The greater part of tlie poison may have been expelled before death, or only a small dose may have been given to the deceased. These facts respecting the action of arsenic are now so well known to lawyers and medical men, that they are seldom disjnited. Nevertheless in a trial for murder at the Lewes summer assizes, 184i) {Refjiaa v. Gecrimj), an attempt was made to refer the non-occurrence of putrefaction, in a case of poi.soning by arsenic, to another cause. The deceased, Richard Geei-ing, died on September 13, 1848, and his body was exhumed April 27, 1849, after an interment of rather more than seven months. When the coffin was opened, the fiice and upper parts of the body were much decomposed. The viscera Avliich were sent to me were in a remarkable state of preservation. The substance of the heart was quite firm. Arsenic was found in well-marked quantity in all these parts. In the defence, a village undertaker was called to prove that, in burying the body, he had pkiced a slab of wood inuuediately above the coffin in order to keep the earth from it. An attempt was thus made to account for the preservation of the body irrespective of the action of arsenic. But this hypothesis was inadmissible. A slab of wood could scarcely affect the oidinary course of putrefaction in a grave ; and if it did, it would influence it in all jiarts equally. In tliis instance those parts of the back only were preserved, in which arsenic was found: the abdominal viscera, wliich are commonly the first to undergo putrefaction in its ordinary course, were here less changed than the other organs of the body (' Med. Gazette,' vol. 45, p. 19). Chloride of zinc, a powerful irritant poison, is another well-known preserva- tive. It retards putreliiction apparently by combining with the tissues. In the case o^ Ann Palmer {llegina v. J'ahner, 185G), whose body was exhumed after twelve months' burial, all the organs were found presei-ved ; they con- tained antimony, which had penetrated even to the ovaries and the substance of the uterus. 7. Accelerators of Fiifrefaction.—It has been alleged that there are certain chemical substances which have the property of accelerating the process of putrefaction : and among these lime has been particularly mentioned. The strong mineral acids and alkalies in a concentrated slate, act poweriuUy as solvents of the soft structures of the body: but they destroy it by immediately corroding it, and not by producing any changes in it analogous to putrefaction. Persons who have been guilty of murder have endeavoured, but ineffectually, to destroy the dead human body rapidly ;—sometimes by attempting to burn it, and at other times by the use of nitric acid or lime. The attempt has generally failed. Dr. Welister endeavoured to dispose of the dead body of Dr. Parkman by employing various chemical reagents, but without effect. In the case of the Mannings {Reg. v. Manning and wife, C. C. C. October 1849), it came out in evidence, that the body of the deceased O'Connor Avas buried in a hole beneath the stone floor of a kitchen. The tAvo prisoners, in order to destroy the body, poured over it a pint and a half of vitriol, and then covered it Avith fresh burnt lime, Avhich Avas slaked upon it under the idea that this Avould rapidly destroy it; but the body Avas disinterred, and all the fivcts necessary to shoAv that the deceased had been murdered, Avere clearly brought out. At the trial it Avas stated by one of the medical Avitnesses that linn' Avould certainly cause a dead body to decompose more rapidly, that the features Avould be thereby much disfigured, and the brain reduced to a fluid state. This theory Avas set up in order to account for the apparently rapid putrefaction of the body, compared with the time that deceased had been


[123/1290 b21964944_0123.jp2]

59 EFFECT OF LLME. FUTREFACTION IN THE EARTH. missing: but this Avas sufficiently accounted for without resorting to this hypothesis, by tlie season of the year (August) and the superficial interment. The medical opinion here given regarding the effect of lime, was in accordance with a popular vieAv which appears to be incorrect. Some years previously to the trial of the Mannings, the dead body of a child, placed in a box and covered with lime, was brought to me for examination in reference to a charge of infanticide. Considering the period of death and the season of the year, the body was in a better state of preservation than might have been expected. The abdomen and lower extremities, which had been completely covered with powdered lime, Avere very well preserved. There was nothing to show that the lime had exercised any accelerating influence. On the contrary it had probably retarded putrefaction by keeping off air. A stiff cream of lime has no corrosive or caustic action on the skin or muscles: its chief use in the tanning of skins, is not to corrode them, but to combine with and remove the fatty portions. Comparative experiments were performed with powdered lime, partially slaked by exposure, on portions of raw flesh. The flesh acquired a greenish colour on the outside, but was speedily dried by the action of the lime, and after five weeks it was found that putrefaction had become aiTCsted, and the flesh was harder and firmer than a similar portion which had been exposed to air during the same period (' Med. Gazette,' 1850, vol. 45, p. 20), Dr. John Davy from the results of his experiments has arrived at a similar conclusion. With the exception of cuticle, hair, and nail, which were softened by the action of Avet lime, he found that this alkaline earth did not exercise any destructive or corrosive power on animal substances generally, nor one promoting their decomposition. On the contrary, in the dry state, it exerted a preservative and decidedly antiseptic poAver, arresting putrefaction even afler it had commenced (' Med. Gaz.' Jan. 1850). 2. Putrefaction in the Earth.—Exhumations are occasionally required for the purposes of justice, and it is under these circumstances that opportunities may occur for observing the progress of putrefaction in the dead. Unfor- tunately the results of these observations have hitherto led to no satisfactory conclusion; for sometimes one body has been found more decomposed after six or eight months' burial, than another which has lain interred for a j)ei'iod of eighteen months or two years. From facts hitherto collected, especially from the researches made by Orfila, it Avould appear that the changes Avhich take place are .similar to those described in speaking of putrefaction in air. There is in the first instance a discoloration of the .skin of the abdomen, owing to decomposition taking place more readily in the contents of the viscera. The skin of the Avhole body becomes green, and the epidermis is loose and easily detached by pressure or friction. The muscles also acquire a dark green colour, are more or less pulpy, and in the course of time lose their fibrous cha- racter. The lungs arc distended with gases, and completely fill the cavity of the chest. The heart and liver are softened, and acquire a dark slate colour. The same change is observed in the spleen and kidneys—the fat around the latter organs being commonly Avhite and firm. The Avhole of these organs will be found much reduced in size; thus the liver may Aveigh no more than a pound or twenty ounces. The surfaces of the soft organs, especially of the- liver, frequently present small circular patches of a hard Avhite crystalline substance, Avhich is insoluble in Avater. It consists chiefiy of crystals of jihos- phate of lime Avith organic matter, and in some instances associated Avith the phosphate of ammonia and magnesia. I have found these crystalline deposits in bodies which have been exhumed at periods varying from one to three years after interment. When the process is farther advanced, the soft organs are filled


[124/1290 b21964944_0124.jp2]

60 COXDITIONS OF THE BODY AFTER LOXG INTERMENT. with bladders of air, and float on water. The stomach, intestines, and urinary bladder have their mucous surfaces stained with patches of a brown, green, or deep slate colour. Sometimes these stains are of a coaly blackness. Tin? coats of the stomach, if entire, niay be closely adherent. They are very thni, and are frequently ruptured in the attempt to examine them. All the con- tents may have disajjpeared with the exception of a thin layer of a black- looking substance, which is probably decomposed blood. The lining membrane is sometimes covered with deposits of small hard crystals of phosphate of lime, or phosphate of ammonia and magnesia. These must not be mistaken for crystals of white arsenic. The stomach and intestines may be stained of a deep orange or yelloAV colour with bile. This may be identified by its forming ;i gi-een-coloured solution when boiled in hydrochloric acid. The marks ol irritant poisoning, and those pathological changes in the viscera, Avhich arc so characteristic of death from poison, are now lost in the discoloration^■ produced by putrefaction. As the process adA'ances, the body becomes covered with fatty incrustations of a i-eddish-brown colour, and the interstices are filled with the common blue, white, or green mouldiness, intermixed with a reddish-coloured fungus. The skin and soft parts become thin, fall off in places, and expose the bones. The coverings of the chest and abdomen are so collapsed as to be in contact with the anterior portion of the spine. The muscles are considerably reduced in bulk ; and they may be found in part con- verted into adipocere. The viscera are also much shrunk, collapsed, and often, if we except the stomach and duodenum, so intermixed, that it is not possible to identify or separate them. The liver may in this way be found incorporated Avith the lungs, oAving to the destruction of the diaphragm ; and the brain completely collapsed. In one exhu.mation, after four years' burial, the Avhole of the soft parts of the chest and abdomen, formed a soft whitish-yelloAv mass disposed in layers. It Hvas impossible to distinguish the stomach from the liver, intestines, or lungs. The periods of time over Avhich I have had an opportunity of examining exhumed bodies, have varied from one month to ■ eight years. In the case o^ Peter Maioer, yf\\o?,Q remains were exhumed at Boston in 1862, after eight years' burial in a damp grave, the body Avas in fragments, the soft parts loosely adhering to the bones, immersed in a large • quantity of Avater in the coffin. The muscles, soft organs, and skin Avere • converted into a AAdiite sodden mass, in Avhich no organ or part could be identified. The mass had a fibrous structure : it contained oily matter, and had a very offensive odour like decayed cheese. The bones Avere of a dark colour : they could be drawn pei-fectly clean out of the soft parts. The Avater • of the coffin contained phosphate and sulphate of ammonia, Avith animall matter. At this period the features are entirely destroyed, and the form of the skull: and skeleton generally, is apparent. In a still more advanced stage, scarcely any traces of the soft organs are to be met Avith. The muscles, if not already changed as above described, pass to the condition of broAvn foliaceous masses. This is chiefly observed in those bodies Avhich have been buried in a dry gravelly soil. The bones are disarticulated, the long bones giving the perfect: outline of the skeleton, Avhile the short and flat bones, including the bodies of: the vertebra Avith the base of the skull, are converted into a broAvnish-white' pulverulent mass, mixed Avith the friable remains of the Avooden coffin in which the body Avas buried. It has been found utterly impossible to assign any definite period of time to these changes, or, from an observation of them, to give any certain opinion respecting the length of time which a body has been interred. The reason is obvious : bodies imdergo these changes Avith very difl^erent deo-rees of rapidity, even when they have been interred under similar circumstances In


[125/1290 b21964944_0125.jp2]

DESTRUCTION OF THE SOFT FARTS. Gl one body, buried for a jx-riod of nine months, and in another for thirteen niontlis, there woi-e no traces of the coverings of the abdomen to be discovered; in a tliird, these coverings were found ahnost entire after a burial of twenty- three months; yet these three bodies had been wrapped in cloth of the same texture, and buried by the side of each other in coffins of the same kind of wood (Orfila). It is commonly said that the soft parts are entirely destroyed in a period of from seven to ten years; but this must depend on the circumstances under which the body is buried, i. e. the kind of coffin, the nature of the soil, and the depth of the grave. Devergie states, that in one instance he met with no trace of a shroud in a body which had been buried three years and a half, while in another a portion was discovered after seven years' interment. I had an opportunity of examining a grave in which a body had been buried twenty- five years. Soft fragments of the coffin of a dark brown colour were found but of the body only the skull (excepting the base) and some portions of the long bones, remained. In an adjoining grave, nearly the entire skeleton Avas discovered lying at full length, surrounded by the decomposed coffin. This was after thii-ty-four years' burial, and the bones were nearly all perfect. I also found here traces of the shroud on the inside of what had been part of the coffin-plate, and the textiu'e of linen was made evident by submitting it to the microscope. Unless the body has been buried in metal, or converted into adipocere, it is not probable that any of the soft parts will be found, in a soil favourable for decomposition, after ten or twelve years. They may exist as a sort of unctuous fat mixed with the wood and earthy matter, but they are not likely to be in a condition to admit of identification. Perhaps the usual period for the destruction of the soft parts in thin wooden coffins, may be taken at about ten years. In most instances of judicial exhumation the period of interment is well known, and no opinion is required of a medical witness on this matter. The only case in which he may be called upon to give an opinion, is where a skeleton or some bones have been discovered lying loosely in the soil. This part of the subject will be considered hereafter. Great embarrassment might exist in defining the period of interment in an unknown case, when a body has been buried in a coffin; but this does not, for obvious reasons, occur in practice. The bodies of those who have died by a violent death, are commonly buried superficially in loose ground without a coffin; hence the data obtained by examining the progress of decomposition of bodies placed in coffins, even if they were more precise, could rarely be available for practical purposes. As the teeth, the bones, and the hair are among the most indestructible parts of the body, it will be necessary in an exhmnation to look for any portions of these that may remain. They often throw light upon the age and sex of the individual, and serve to determine questions of identity. The circumstances which modify the progress of putrefaction in the earth may be in some measure anticipated from what has been already said of this process in air. Among them may be enumerated age, constitution, state of health or disease, the kind of death, whether the body be mutilated or entire when buried, the period during which it may have been exposed to the atmo- sphere before interment, the nature of the soil in which it is buried, and the depth of the grave, with other circumstances, the precise influence of which it is difficult to estimate. There are a few special conditions which may affect the decomposition of bodies buried in the earth : — without a knowledge of them a witness may be led to express an erroneous opinion. The most important are— 1. Period of Interment.—It is well ascertained that a body putrefies much more rapidly in aii- than in any other medium ; lience, if it be kept long


[126/1290 b21964944_0126.jp2]

62 rUTREFACTIOX IN GRAVES. exj)osecl before it is interred, putrefoction will take place much more readily, and advance to a much greater extent, than if it had been buried soon after death. On this subject it may be remarked, that, if a body be kept exposed during the summer for five or six days, and then interred, it may be found on exhumation after the lapse of a month, that putrefaction is as far advanced as it would have been after the lapse of several months, supposing that the subject had been interred within a few hours after death. Owing to this circumstance there is a difference in the rapidity of decomposition accord- ing to whether the bodies on which the observations have been made, were interred after exposui-e to a hot and moist, or cold and dry atmosjdiere. It has been already stated, that the period at which cadaveric rigidity of the nuiscular system ceases, is that at which putrefaction may be considered to commence. Many circumstances have been pointed out, which retard or accelerate the access of this condition of the body. When cadaveric rigidity has been retarded by any of the circumstances mentioned, the putrefactive process Avill necessarily be a longer time in making its appearance. When the rigidity is a speedy consecjuence of dissolution, we may expect that putrefaction will take place rapidly. 2. Deposition of Ova by Insects.—According to Orfila, there are no fewer than twenty species of insects which deposit their ova on the surface of the dead body; and the hirvte produced li:om these ova, rapidly assist in the decomposition and entire destruction of parts. Among these, the miisca tachina simplex and carnnria may be particularly mentioned. For a short period after death, flies and other insects, even of a parasitic kind, seem to avoid the body; they rarely approach it or deposit their ova upon it until putrefaction is about to commence. When these ova are once deposited, larvse are speedily produced from them, and decomposition now rapidly advances. The development of these insects commonly takes place with such rapidity that the siirface of the body as well as the outlets, if the temperature of the atmosphere be at all high, becomes very soon covered with ova and larvce. It is obvious that the development of many thousands of these o-\ a may not take place until the body is placed Avithin the grave; and, when interred imder these circumstances, it will be found, on exhumation after a given time, to have nm through the different stages of decomposition with much greater rapidity than another body, the interment of which may have taken place before any ova were deposited. Admitting the correctness of these observations, a medical jurist may expect to find that a body, interred during simmier, Avill, after a given time, have advanced to a gi-eater degree of putrefaction, than one Avhich was inten-ed during winter, all other circum- stances being equal. 3. Nature of the Soil in irhirh the Inicrment takes place.—If the groxmd is elevated or on an acclivity, it will commonly be diy, and decompos'ition Avill i be retarded : if the body is buried in a low situation, or in a valley, the soil I being generally damp, decomposition Avill be hastened. A dry and absorbent soil will invariably retard putrefaction : and thus, bodies buried in the sands of Egypt become often perfectly desiccated, and resist the process for a lono- series of years. The chemical nature of the soil, also, has an influence, which may be briefly stated. In sand, gravel, or chalk, putrefaction goes on more slowly than in other soils, and adipocere is rarely met with, unless there be free access ol Avater, Avhen that portion of the body exposed to the current may becomr adipocerous. In marl or clay, if air has access, the process takes place more quickly, especially in loose mould or in any porous soil much impregnated Avitli animal or vegetable matter. It is in these last-mentioned soils, provided they are not too dry, that the formation of adipocere is most abundant; and it is


[127/1290 b21964944_0127.jp2]

INFLUENCE OF SOIL AND DEPTH OF THE GEAVE. 63 important to observe, that, hoAvever great tlie rapidity -witli -^Thich putrcfac-- tiou may have advanced previously, it is either suspended or modified on tlie occurrence of tliis change. By a reference to the nature of the soil, therefore, we may often explain why a body, after having been interred ibr a con- siderable number of years, may be exhmned apparently unaltered by decom- position. The whole of the soft parts may have become converted into this Avhite substance; but although the physical outline may be preserved, the texture of the organs will be completely changed. 4. Tlie Depth of the Grave.—Observation shows that the deeper the grave, cateris paribus, the longer j)utrefaction is retarded. This may depend upon several circumstances : as the want of a free access of air in deep graves, and the uniformly low temperature which is known to prevail, at all seasons of the year, at a certain depth below the suriace of the soil. Bodies buried in sliallow graves are subject to all the fluctuations of temperature Avhich take place during the day and night, and throughout the seasons of the year; they are therefore most tiivourably placed foi- the rapid progress of putrefaction. According to the most accurate observations, the diurnal changes of tempera- ture extend to about three feet in depth below the surface, while the monthlj' changes are perceptible to the depth of six feet. Bodies buried below this depth pvitrefy slowly, ca'teris paribus, owing to the imiform and comparatively low temperature which is there maintained. As in these cases, there is no free access of oxygen, ammonia and sulphuretted hydrogen are abimdant products of decomposition. The exposed parts of the skin are soi't, completely brown like the skin of a mulatto, and the limbs, as well as the fact, are thickly covered with a soft white timgus. Such has been the condi- ti(m of bodies of which I have witnessed the exhumation, after an interment of from one to two years. 5. The State in ichich the Body is buried.—Putrefaction is more rapid in bodies buried naked, than in those Avhich have been buried wrapped in clothes. This point may be a subject requiring especial attention in investi- gations relative to infimticide, since the bodies of children are usually throAvn naked into a pit, and loosely covered with earth. The process is less rapid when the body is interred in a close coflin : and when the hitter is formed of an imperishable material, such as lead, closely sealed, putrefaction is speedily arrested; and the deceased may be recognized after the lapse 6f many yeai-s. Tlie reason why bodies are comparatively preserved under these circrmistances, is obviously owing to the access of air being cut off. Any confined mass of air, so soon as the Avhole of the oxygen contained within it, is removed by combination, acts antiseptically, forming an atmosphere of nitrogen which retards putrefaction, and thus the body may bo preserved for a long period. The soil of privies and cesspools, according to Orfila, retards putrefaction considerably ; but this is not in accordance with the observations of others, or with recorded facts. Fomiation of Adipocere. Saponification.—In the course of these observa- tions, I have had frequent occasion to speak of the dead body becoming sometimes converted into adipocere : it will be therefore proper to explain what is meant by this process of conversion. The substance called adipocere was first observed and described by Four- croy during the removal of vast numbers of bodies fi-om the Cimetiere des Innocens in Paris. He gave to it this name, owing to its properties being intermediate between those of wax and fat. He considered it to be constituted of fiitty matter and ammonia. From an analyr.is by Chevreul, the substance described by Fourcroy was proved to be a real ammoniacal soap with some extraneous colouring matter, Avhich gave it a yellowish or brown colour. It


[128/1290 b21964944_0128.jp2]

PRODUCTIOX OF ADirOCERE IX THE DEAD. 64 contuined, besides, a bitter substance not defined, and an odoriferous principle, to whicli it owed its smell. Chevreul also detected in some specimens, lime, potash, and salts. The composition of adipocere does not appear to be uniform : it is liable to vary according to the nature of the medium to which the body has been exposed. Thus, in hard or river water, the white sub- stance so called, discovered in the dead body, is formed of a base of lime : so, in bodies laid in graves or vaults wdiich are traversed by springs of water con- taining sulphate or carbonate of lime, an adipocere of stearate and oleate of lime is found as a hard white solid. It is not improbable, as Orfila hfis sug- gested, that iu the first instance an ammoniacal soap is produced, and that this is subseqxiently converted into a calcareous soap by contact with calcareous water. Indeed, Orfila states that he experimentally established this point, by placing ammoniacal soap in maceration in a solution of sulphate of lime. In three weeks, he found that the calcareous, had become substituted for the ammoniacal base. . Any part of the human body may undergo this change, but all parts are not equally susceptible of it. In order that the adipocere described by Four- croy should be foimd, it is indispensable that the animal fat should be in contact with substances containing nitrogen. Experiment has clearly esta- blished, that neither pure lat, nor pure fibrin, when kept apart will become saponified. Orfila found by comparative experiments, that the skin deprived of all fat did not undergo this change; but when the fat was allowed to adhere to it, it became saponified. Upon the knowledge of these facts, the following theory of the production of adipocere was founded. The fat containing no nitrogen, could not furnish ammonia; consequently it could not spontaneously change into this substance. The fibrin of the muscular system was therefore supposed to produce ammonia, by giving off hydrogen and nitrogen ; and this alkali combined with the fatty acids of the body to form a soap (see ' Ure's Dictionary, art. Adipocere'). Devergie has shown, that the fat of the female breasts, that of the hollow of the cheeks, and other large fatty accumulations, are the first to take on this change, Avhile the fatty layers immediately in con- tact with the muscles, present no appearance of saponification, until a conside- rably later period. We have observed this change in a body after interment for a year, in the fat of the kidneys and omentum, as well as in the fatty appendages of the large intestines. As the fat of the body is contained in a cellular membrane (a nitrogenous compound), and is traversed by the blood and other nitrogenous fluids, the nitrogen is as readily furnished by these,. as by the fibrin of the muscles. So, agaiu: the skin and fiit, separated from the nniscles, will become converted into adipocere. The fibrin of muscles, therefore, although unquestionably it may be one source of the ammonia, is not the sole source. Oil or fat exists throughout the soft organs and tissues of the whole body; hence every part may undergo this transformation.. When the change is complete, the body maintains its condition for many years.. Thus, in one instance, after seventeen years' burial in a grave, an exhumed 1 body was found to be converted into this substance, and many of the oro-ans-; could .still be identified (' Phil. Med. Exam.' April 1847, p. 247). ^ This process takes place most readily—1. In the bodies of young pei-sons, the fat being chiefly external and very abundant. 2. In those adults whose bodies abound in fat. 3. In bodies exposed to the soil of water-closets. 4. In those immersed in water, but somewhat less rapidly in statrnant than in running waiter. 5. Readily in humid and fatty soils, especially in frave- yards, where numerous bodies have been piled in contact with each other. In this latter case, those which are situated at the lowest level have been observed to become the_ soonest saponified. The ])eriod required for saponification to take place varies according to circumstances. Devergie states that the body


[129/1290 b21964944_0129.jp2]

PROPEllTIES OF ADirOCEEE. 65 of a newly-born child in the soil of water-closets may become entirely saponi- fied in from six weeks to two months; while in a drowned subject in water, saponification may be partially met with in three or four months ; and in one buried in a damp grave, from two to three years may sometimes elapse before saponification is complete. There is no doubt, however, that the process may take place partially in the dead body, within much shorter periods than these. A body floating in water has been found converted into this adipocerous state in a little more than five Aveeks; and with regard to the period in an ordinary grave, I may refer to the case of a female, exhumed at Bristol, in 1835, after foixrteen months' interment. The lower part of the body was liere found adipocerous. It appears that the grave was very damp, and the line of adipocerous transformation in the deceased was bounded by the level to which the water had reached. These facts are of more importance than may at first sight appear, since a legal question of survivorship, in at least two cases, has turned upon the shortest period required for the production of true adipocere in the dead body. Properties of Adipocere.—Fourcroy and other French chemists describe adipocere as an unctuous, soapy substance, varying in colour from a pale Avhite to various shades of yellow or brown. In the first instance it is soft, but becomes hai-der and lighter in colour when dried. It melts at 200°, and when strongly heated in air gives off an ammoniacal odour, inflames, and burns. It is easily suspended in cold water, and forms an opaque mixture on boiling. Acids decompose the solution by combining with the bases, forming salts. When heated with lime, ammonia is evolved. It is only partly dissolved by boiling alcohol. Adipocere with a calcareous base is harder and whiter than that which contains ammonia. There is no trace of organic structure in either. Having had an opportunity of examining this substance as it is found in bodies after long interment in damp graves, I here subjoin a description of its properties. A man named Peter Mawer died and was buried at Boston in October 1854, and his body was exhumed for judicial purposes in June 1862. I have already described the condition in which it was tbund after an inter- ment of eight years (see page GO). The white substance into which all the organs had been completely transformed was unctuous to the touch, and had a peculiar and highly-off'ensive odour. When completely dried it was soft, white, somewhat brittle, with a fibrous structure, and crumbled imder the knife. Examined by the microscope, it presented none of the usual characters of muscular fibre. It appeared to be a confused net- woi-k of fibres cemented by a white, fatty-looking substance. It had a dis- agreeable rancid odour, which was increased when the substance was heated. It was in great part dissolved by alcohol, and the solution became opaque on adding to it water. It readily floated on water, forming an opaque solution when boiled : the greater part Avas dissolved, but the liquid did not become clear on filtration. The solution had a slight acid reaction on litmus paper. When heated with potash, it became clear, and evolved ammo- nia. The substance Avas almost entirely soluble in potash, and the solution gave a white precipitate with acids. The potash solution gave no ti-ace of the presence of sulphur. It formed a red-coloured liquid when boiled in strong hydrochloric acid. It Avas carbonized by sulphuric acid. The aqueous solution contained no sulphuric or phosphoric acid or lime : it contained an abundance of alkaline chloride with animal matter which reduced nitrate of silver. It Avas only partially fused at 212°. When heated in a close tube, it gave out an offensive rancid odour; it evolved ammonia and traces of sulphur; it readily melted, and by continuing the heat, a dense oily vapour having an acid reaction Avas distilled over—a carbonaceous residue F


[130/1290 b21964944_0130.jp2]

INFERENCE OF THE TIME OF DEATH. 66 being left in the tube. When heated on platinum, it melted, took fire, and bin-nt with the bright yellow flame of hydrocarbon. It left a mineral residue of a brownish colour owing to the presence of oxide of iron : this residue amounted to five per cent, of its weight. The residue was in great part soluble in water, the solution having a strong alkaline reaction and efTei-vescmg with acids. It contained the carbonates of potash and soda, with phosphate of lime and chloride of sodium, as well as traces of alkaline sulphate and oxide of iron. Adipocere, therefore, does not appear to be a definite compound. It is a vari- able mixture of the fatty portions of the body with altered organic tissues. It contains in a concentrated form, besides ammonia as a result of decomposition, the bases as well as the salts which are found in the animal solids and fluids. These appear to be intimately combined with the fatty portions of the tissues. CHAPTER 5. INFEREKCE OF THE PERIOD OF DEATH IN A BODY AFTER PUTREFACTION IN- STANCES OF RAPID DECOMPOSITION OF THE BODY PROBABLE CAUSES DETERMINATION OF THE TIME OF DEATH — PUTREFACTION SUSPENDED : CASE OF DESHA PUTREFACTION ACCELERATED CASES OF MRS. BYRNE AND JOSEPH MAHAIG MARKS ON THE SKIN — PROTRUSION OF THE EYE AND TONGUE, AS A RESULT OF PUTREFACTION OR STRANGULATION PUTREFACTION IN WATER PERIOD OF IMMERSION IN WATER. Inference of the period of death in reference to a hody after Putrefaction.— Orfila, after having devoted many years to the investigation of this subject, and after the comparative examination of some hundreds of exhumed bodies, of all ages, and of both sexes, came to the conclusion, that it was beyond the reach of science to determine with accuracy the period of death, from the progress of putrefaction. Bodies which had been buried for an equal length of time in the same soil, and under apparently similar conditions, frequently presented such differences, as to baffle all attempts at generalization. This question becomes even more difficult, when the body is submitted to examina- tion, and none of the conditions under which the person has died, or to which the body has been exposed since death, are known. It will be perceived from what has been already stated, that the circumstances which affect the rate and progress of putrefaction, are'numerous and of a variable character. If we can obtain no histoiy of the case, a medical opinion can be little more than a con- jecture ; if, however, we are informed of the atmospheric and other conditions to which a dead body has been exposed, it may then be in our jiower to arrive at a probable, if not a definite conclusion. In the description of the modifying conditions above given, the practitioner will find some points which may render him assistance, or, at any rate, enable him to avoid some of the serious errors which have been made by medical witnesses in reference to this subject. It has been elsewhere stated, that putrefaction does not commonly commence, until about the third day after death, at any rate there is usually no external sign of the process until that date; but there are many instances known of it>: commencing almost immediately after death, and proceeding with great rapidity, while, in other cases, more than twenty days have passed, without any manifes- tation of its appearance (page 36). The experience of my colleague, Dr. Wilks, who has for many years con- ducted the post-mortem examinations at Guy's Hospital, and who has had an opportunity of inspecting about four thousand dead bodies, may be here briefly referred to. At Guy's Hospital, most cases are inspected within twenty-four hours after death, Avhen, as a rule, the body is rigid, and no decomposition lias


[131/1290 b21964944_0131.jp2]

67 CASES OF KAPID DECOMPOSITION. taken place. If after two or three days much change should be present, it is generally to be attributed to some peculiarity in the cause of death. The decomposition is not .shown, as at a still later period, by a mere change of colour, as a greenish hue of the abdomen, but by a redness of the whole body, and by dark stains in the course of the superficial veins. Even when these external changes are scarcely observable, there may be found considerable alterations within the body, shoAvn more especially by discolouration of the heart and arteries from the blood. These changes appear to be connected with a diseased state of the blood, and axe met with in those who have died of fever, pyajmia, and similar maladies. In cases of strangulated hernia, in which death speedily follows an operation, the post-mortem changes are sometimes observed to be very rapid. It is a common observation, that moisture in the atmosphere appears to favour decomposition much more than heat; thus putridity is much more rapid on a moist winter's day than on a hot dry day in summer. These facts may be illustrated by cases from the records. 1. In September 1855, the body of a man who had been killed, was examined thirty-eight hours after death ; it had begun to undergo decomposition in the ordinary manner. The body of another man, who had died of phthisis, was examined forty-four hours after death, and in this there was no trace of decomposition. On the following day an inspection was made of the body of a man who had died in a few hovirs after fracture of the ribs. Only forty- eight hours had elapsed since death, but considerable decomposition had already taken place. 2. Sometimes decomposition is so rapid that in a few hours the features of a person are unrecognizable. A man, £Bt. 26, died on November 28th, 1855, of typhoid fever, and perforation of the ileum. The weather was cold and moist. When the examination was about to be made, in sixteen hours, the body was wholly unlike that of the man when alive. There was no rigidity; the whole body Avas bloated; the cellular tissue was greatly distended, so that wlien the skin was pierced the gas which escaped was easily ignited into a flame. The colour of the surface was of a reddish hue. The internal organs were also much decomposed ; of a dark colour, soft, and emitting a very fetid odour. The liver Avas full of air. The patient was a temperate man, residing in the country. 3. A man, sit. 35, shot himself with a pistol, producing fracture of the skull and injury to the brain, fr-om which he died in six days. On December 13th, 1854, the atmosphere being cold but moist, the body was brought into the room for examination, thirteen hours after death. The rigidity was imper- fect, but still present to a slight degree; the body was Avarm ; when opened, it showed that a remarkable change had taken place internally, so tlxat it was even suggested Avhether decomposition had not commenced during life. The brain, besides being sloughy, was rapidly decomposing; the lungs showed an early inflammation, and the tubes Avere deeply stained by imbibition; the interior of the heart and arteries Avas of a dark-purple colour, and the clots in the heart were mixed Avith air; the peritoneum was discoloured; the liver presented a very remarkable appearance, it Avas full of air, and thus resembled very much a mass of fermenting dough; on the surface Avere bubbles of air ready to burst: this organ contained two small pyajmic abscesses. The spleen was of a greenish colour ; the kidneys closely resembled the liver, being, like it, distended from decomposition, and containing air-bubbles throughout their substance.—(See ' Guy's Plospital Eeports,' October 1863, p. 181.) In addition to these cases, Dr. Wilks has communicated^ to me another, in ■which a man, a3t. 50, died in Guy's Hospital, from an accident in December 1860. He lost much venous blood, and, Avithout shoAving any sign of rally- ing from the accident, he died on the fbui-th day after his admission. For a F 2


[132/1290 b21964944_0132.jp2]

B8 PUTREFACTION. CASES OF THE few hours before death, he suffered from great difficulty of breathing, and his pulse Avas not perceptible. Ths man died at 6 p.m., and in an hour or two his body was carried to the dead-house. The weather was frosty, and it Avas a hard frost during the night that the body lay in the dead-house. On thefollowing day (only twenty hours after death), putrefaction had advanced to such a degree, that the deceased could scarcely be recognized. The skin was through- out distended by the gases of putrefaction. All the viscera were decomposed, the liver contained putrescent gases, and even the coats of the gall-bladder were distended with them. This was a case of rapid death, probably from blood-poisoning. The following is a remarkable instance of the rapidity with which putrefac- tion may take place in a dead body. A man, ast. 39, was admitted into Guy's Hospital in October 1849. He was fat, of pale complexion, and of intem- perate habits. The muscles were flabby. He died suddenly after a few days, without suffering from any symptoms indicative of danger. His death took place at 10.30 p.m., the body remained in the ward until 8 a.m. the following mominfr, the air having a temperature of from 60° to 65°. The conditions as to cooling and rigidity Avere not observed during the night; but when removed at the hour mentioned, decomposition had already commenced. The s\in on the left side was raised in large bladders, containing a bloody liquid. At 2.30 P.M. i.e. sixteen hours after death, the entire skin was more or less of a blue or purple colour ; the eyes protruded from the sockets, and the nostrils were filled with a bloody froth, from which minute bubbles of gas continually issued. The abdomen, as well as the scrotum, Avas greatly distended with gas. The groins A\'ere much putrefied and Avere covered Avith minute blood- vesicles. I saw the body seventeen hours after death. The skin of the neck and face had then a bloated and tense appearance from the collection of gas ■ beneath. Blue, green, and livid-red discolourations were seen more or less ■ over the whole surface, Avith bladders or vesicles as in the adA^anced putre- faction of bodies after some days' exposure in hot weather. The gases A\diichi issued in jets from every part of the skin in which a puncture Avas made,. Avere highly offensive. When a flame Avas applied to the puncture, the gas- bumt suddenly, Avith almost explosive violence. The gas did not discolour slips of paper moistened with acetate of lead or nitrate of silver : hence neither sulphuretted nor phosphuretted hydrogen Avas present. It burnt: like the bright carburetted hydrogen; and I believe that it Avas this gas,. mixed with other gases and vapours derived from putrefaction. When tlie tense skin of the scrotum Avas punctured, a jet of carburetted hydrogen, escaped, which burnt steadily, Avith a pale yelloAvish flame, for above a minute.. The state of the body precluded a post-mortem examination, Avhich Avas con-- sidered unnecessary (' Med. Gaz.' 1850, vol. 45, p. 17). This case resembles- in its features one AA'hich occurred to Dr. Wilks. See case 2, p. 67. The condition of this body in reference to the process of putrefaction Ava such as 'M. Devergie assigns to dead bodies at a period of six to tAvelve da^ after death, on the assumption that they have been freely exposed to the aii at a mean temperature (' Med. Leg.' vol. 2, p. 406). Had the body of thi person been found in a house under these circumstances, and had the histor\ of the case been entirely unknoAvn,—a medical man, asked to assign a period of death, might, from common experience in such matters, have declared it to be impossible that the deceased could have been living Avithin tAventy-four hours previously to the discovery. Suspicion might thus have been removed from persons really guilty of murder, because it might have been proved that they had not been in or near the house until Avithin a day of tlic discovery of the body. On the other hand, an innocent person Avho had been seen in company with the deceased five or six days previously, or who Ind


[133/1290 b21964944_0133.jp2]

EAPID DECOMPOSITION OF THE BODY. 09 voluntarily remained in the same room with the body, might be unjustly charged Avitli having been accessory to his death. This, with other instances of a similar kind, shows that unusual caution is required in expressinga medical opinion on the time at which death took place, in bodies which are found much decomposed. The causes of this rapid access and progi-ess of putrefaction in the body of a man dying in the prime of life, cannot be assigned to the season of the year, or to the operation of any unusual external influences. It may have been due to the condition of the body, especially of the blood, at the time of death. This man was of intemperate habits, with a flabby muscular system, and low vital energy. These were precisely the conditions favourable to the speedy loss of muscular irritability after death, with the appearance and disappearance of cadaveric rigidity, after an unusually short duration. The fourth or putrefactive stage was therefore reached in a few hours. The ward temperature, 65°, was favourable to the process, and the blood and other fluids of the body were probably prone to decomposition. Although the body was removed into a cooler atmosphere on the morning following death, yet the process having once commenced, progressed with great rapidity. The late Sir Henry Marsh has described a case of a somewhat similar kind. A man Avho had been ill about fourteen days, was admitted into the Hotel Dieu, at Paris, imder M. Bally. Pie died on the night after his admission ; and on examination eight hours afterwards, his body presented the Ibllowing appearances :—The whole of the skin was distended with air ; it Avas of a violet colour, and studded with a vesicular eruption in detached sj^ots, the vesicles being tilled, some with a reddish-coloured serum, and others with gas. The abdomen was also much distended by gas, this having accumiilated not in the intestines, but in the cavity of the peritoneum. Upon cutting into any emphysematous part, an inflammable gas escaped which was readily ignited by the flame of a candle. From a perforation in the abdomen it issued and burnt with a blueish flame (sulphureted hydrogen or carbonic oxide). ('Ed. Med. Journ.' vol. 58, p. 501.) It was thought this state of the body indicated putrefaction before death; but it was merely an instance of its rapid supervention after death. The experiments and observations of M. Brown-Sequard, already referred to (page 17), tend to explain many of the supposed anomalies which present themselves in the commencement, progress, and duration of the process of putrefaction. The various physical and physiological conditions which affect muscular irritabihty, and, with this, cadaveric rigidity in a dead body, equally influence the process. The time for its commencement in a dead body is defined by the cessation of cadaveric rigidity, and this condition again has its commencement defined by the loss of muscular irritability. Some experi- ments on dogs, elseAvhere related (page 17), show that when rigidity appears and disappears shortly after death, putrefliction is speedily manifested in a body, and it pfogresses with great rapidity. It has been long known that the flesh of hunted or over-driven animals rapidly undergoes putrefaction. Brown-Sequard, in September 1851, saw two sheep that had been over- driven to reach a fair. They were killed by the section of the carotid arteries. In less than five minutes after death rigidity was evident in both of them: and putrefaction was manifest before the end of the day, i.e. in less than eight hours after death (' Proc. E. S.' 18G1, No. 44, p. 210). What- ever exhausts muscular power at the time of death, whether it be violent exercise, disease, or poison, tends ccvteris paribus to accelerate putrefaction, and to cause it to spread rapidly. Thus among persons killed by lightning or by strychnia, the body of one may putrefy rapidly, while that of another goes through the ordinary course. It is not due so much to the eflfect of the agent as it is to the mode in which it lias destroyed lile.


[134/1290 b21964944_0134.jp2]

70 PUTREFACTION RETARDED. There is much difficulty in the practical application of those principles to the determination of the probable period of death, in reference to the body of a person found dead. Medical opinions are frequently required in cases of alleged child-murder, on the probable period of the death of a child, whose body has been found in a putrefied state. With a due regard to the con- ditions under which a body has been placed, a medical witness may occasionally be able to say whether its state was such as to be consistent or inconsistent with the delivery of an accused female at a particular period of time. Greater difficulties occur on charges of murder in reference to the bodies of adults found dead under suspicious circumstances. The connection of an accused person with the act may occasionally turn upon the medical opinion respecting the state of the dead body. Dr. Beck furnishes a case illustrative of this statement. A man named Desha was charged with the murder of Francis Baker. The deceased was last seen with the prisoner on the 2ud November 1824. The body of the deceased was foimd on the 8th November, i.e. six days afterwards, in a sheltered hollow, with the throat cut, with several wounds on the head, and a wound on the chest. There was no doubt from the nature of the womids that the deceased had been murdered, and that he must have died soon after their infliction. The defence of the prisoner rested to a great extent on the condition of the body when found, the principal question being, whether the state of the body was consistent with the suggestion of violent death caused six days previously. When discovered, it had undergone so little change that it Avas considered deceased must have been alive some days after the prisoner had been last seen in his company. The body when first found, is described as having been a little stiff; but after carrying it some distance it became pliant. There Avas no appeai-ance of putrefaction about it, either by the smell or by any change of colour in the skin. In two days after its discovery, during Avhich period it had been placed in a room in which there was a fire, putrefaction set in, and the • abdomen and face became much swollen and decomposed. At this time ■ i. e. the eighth day after the deceased had been seen alive, much blood issued I from the wounds (page 49) : according to one medical witness the wounds at this date appeared fresh, according to another they did not. There Avas some conflicting evidence, lay and professional, on the question Avhether putrefaction ■ could be so completely suspended during eight days as it had been in this- instance. The counsel for the prisoner dAvelt upon the absence of the process as a proof that death must have been recent, and therefore that the ■ prisoner could have had no share in it. The judge also inclined to this- vicAv. In addressing the jiu-y he said, " It is difficult to suppose that a body, at this or any season of the year, could have remained that long Avithout: exhibiting some symptoms of putrescence: connect also that in tAvo or three dayss after it Avas found, it did show such symptoms as in that time might naturally.- be expected." Another singular point raised in the prisoner's favour, Avas> that the beard had groAvn after the discovery of the body, and it Avas quiteo short when it was first seen, and had the appearance of having been recently- shaven ; but in the interval of Tuesday and Thursday, after its discovery, it had become a little longer. Counsel contended that the beard Avill cn-oAv after death ; and as, when the body Avas found, the chin Avas cleanly shaven this pointed to recent and not to remote death, as the beard would havt already become elongated when the body was foiuid, had the deceased beer dead six days ! The medical witnesses, in reference to this theory, statci that the appearance of groAvth after death was to be ascribed to a shrinkiiiL of the skin. The jury returned a verdict of guilty. The prisoner sub sequently destroyed himself, and, while dying from his wounds, protested his innocence of this crime. ('Beck's Ued. Jur.' vol. 2. p. 45). This case doe


[135/1290 b21964944_0135.jp2]

PUTREFACTION ACCELERATED. 71 not appear to present much difficulty. The fact that the body of deceased remained six days in a sheltered spot during the month of November, without undergoing any of the usual changes from putrefaction, is consistent with death six days previously. When found, the body had reached the third stage described by Devergie: it was cold and pliant, or readily became so : it had passed through the stage of cadaveric rigidity. According to the observations of Devergie, a dead body cceteris paribus would assume this con- dition in from three to eight days after death (page 45). The fact that putrefaction came on in two or three days after its discovery, although ])erplexing to the judge, is fully explained by the cessation of cadaveric rigidity and the warm temperature to which the body was then exposed. The condition of the beard did not justify the inference that death had been more recent. Neither the age nor the condition of the deceased's body is stated by Dr. Beck, but it is clear that he died suddenly from loss of blood, as well as other injuries. It may be inferred, therefore, that his muscular system was endowed with the ordinary amount of irritability. In cases of healthy persons suddenly killed by decapitation, Brown-Sequard observed that cadaveric rigidity did not appear imtil ten or twelve hours after death, and that it lasted more than a Aveek when the weather was not extremely Avarm. The retardation of putrefaction in the above case may have been due to a similar cause. The medical difficulty in the case of Desha arose chiefly from the suspen- sion of the putrefactive process beyond the average period. Other cases liave occurred, in which the rapid access of putrefaction following sudden death has implicated persons in charges of murder, and they have narrowly escaped conviction, apparently because the changes produced by putrefaction had been mistaken for the effects of violence. In August 1842, Mrs. Ellen Byrne was tried at the Commission Court, Dublin, for the murder of her husband, Augustine Byrne, by strangulation, suffocation, or other violence (' The Trial of Mrs. Ellen Byrne, for the Murder of Mr. Augustine Byrne, specially reported by T. R. Dunckley,' Dublin, 1842). The prisoner and deceased, who were in a respectable condition of life, were in the habit of drinking to excess. On this occasion, they had retired to their bedroom, and about four days after the deceased had been last seen alive, and eight days after they had been in the room, the body of the husband was found dead on the bed, while the wife was in the room. She professed not to know her husband was dead, and sent for a medical man. From his evidence, it appeared that when he first saw the body on Saturday evening (July 9th) it was so much decomposed, that he was led to believe the deceased had been dead at least four or five days. The face and neck were black, and decomposition had gone on to such a degree in these parts, as to obhterate, it w^as believed, any marks of violence that might have been there at the time of death. The right eye was protruded— the tono-ue projected between the teeth to about half an inch: the ears were black, the lips Avere swollen, and the fingers were contracted. There was a frothy liquid issuing from the mouth and nostrils in bubbles, and living larvro were seen in these parts. The whole of the body was greatly swollen, dis- coloured, and passing rapidly into a state of decomposition. When first seen, deceased was lying on his face. There was a faint, heavy smell in the room. An inspection made the next day revealed the fact that putrefaction had taken place in all parts : but the head and neck were most decomposed— the black colour of the skin appeared to decline as it got down to the lower part of the neck. Internally the heart was empty, and the vessels of the brain were perfectly empty : the blood was fluid. Faeculent matter had been discharged from the bowels before death.


[136/1290 b21964944_0136.jp2]

72 PUTEEFACTION. SUSPECTED STRANGULATIOX. There were two medical questions in this case, on which the guilt of the prisoner rested: 1. When did the deceased die ? and, 2. Was death to be ascribed to violent or natural causes? On Friday, July 1, eight days before his body was found, deceased had retired to his bedroom Avith his Avife, and during that time a large quantity of spirits had been taken to the room and con- sumed by him, by his wife, or by both together. On Sunday, the 3rd, the voice of deceased was heard, as if he and his wife were quarrelling. On Monday they Avere not seen : on Tuesday (July 5th), a man-servant deposed that he was called upstairs by the deceased, who spoke to him, and gave him half-a- crown to fetch whiskey. He then heard deceased's voice, and saw his bare arm through the partly-opened door; but from the position in which he was placed, he could not see the whole of deceased's body. After this date, deceased was neither seen nor heard,—he was found dead on the evening of Saturday (July 9th), his body being then in the highly-decomposed state above described. On Wednesday (July Gth), prisoner left the bed-room for a short time, and closed the door. On Thursday (July 7th), and Friday (July 8th), she was seen at the door of the bed-room by the man-servant, and on the latter day by her maid-servant, and she was then quite sober, and spoke to them as usual. On Saturday (July 9th), at 10 o'clock in the morn- ing, she ordered the servant to bring up two cups of tea. Between six and eight o'clock on the evening of that day, she suddenly called to one of her sons, to turn the deceased on his back. On entering the bedroom, he found deceased dead, and his body as above described. As the prisoner had been in the bedroom alone Avith the deceased, either living or dead, from the Tuesday Avhen he Avas last seen, until the Saturday, she must, it was alleged, have been cognizant of his death, if it had not been directly caused by some act on her part. The prisoner made tAvo statements: first, that she slept in the bed on Thursday and Friday, and that deceased died on Friday. Shy .subsequently stated that he died on Saturday, the day on Avhich the body Avas discovered. From the state of decomposition of the body, tAvo of the medical Avitnesses for the prosecution assigned a period of at least four or five days, during Avhich decefised must have been dead. Two declined to give an opinion as to the number of days, and one (Dr. Geoghegan), the Avell-known Profe.ssor of Medical Jurisprudence in Dublin, stated his belief that such changes might take place in from twenty-eight to thirty hours. A medical Avitness called for the defence deposed that he had seen a body as much decomposed tAventy- four hours after death. By reference to cases elscAvhere related (page 68), it Avill be perceived that the shorter period assigned by these two Avitnesses, one for the prosecution and the other for the defence, is quite Avithin the limits assigned by experience, although instances of such rapid putrefaction are not common. In this case, hoAvever, it must be remembered that the dead body was shut up in a close room, at the hottest period of the year, and the circumstances Avere therefore most favourable to the process. Admittino- that this Avas an exceptional instance of rapid decomposition, tlie changes described by the Avitnesses might have occurred Avithin twenty hours of the time at Avhicli the body Avas discovered, thus carrying the death to the nio-ht of Friday the 8th, at the time when prisoner was, according to her statement in bed Avith the deceased. ' The other question, as to the cause of death, gave rise to a conflict of opunon. On the one hand, it Avas alleged that the appearances in the body, i.e., the black and decomposed condition of the hpad and neck, compared Avith other parts, the protrusion of one eye from its socket, and the projection ol' the tongue between the lips, as well as the absence of any natural cause of death, were medical proofs that deceased had died by strangulation and not


[137/1290 b21964944_0137.jp2]

CASE OF MRS. BYRNE. by any disease or accident. On the other hand it Avas asserted that the deceased might have been accidentally suffocated while helplessly intoxicated, by falling with his mouth on the pillow, or that he might have been carried off" by a sudden attack of apoplexy or epilepsy. The discolouration of the face, the protrusion of the eye and tongue, and the discharge of fasces, might be accounted for by his dying during a convulsive struggle ; while the two supposed indications of strangling afforded by the eye and tongue, might be simply the result of the advanced state of decomposition in which the body was Ibund. All the witnesses were agreed, that there Avere no marks on the neck to indicate death by strangulation ; but this want of physical evidence was accounted for by some of thein, on the theory that all such marks would be completely obliterated by putrefaction. The heart contained no blood, and the vessels of the brain were empty, the blood in the body was ffuid and dark-coloured. The state of the hangs is not mentioned, nor the condition of the larynx and air passages, so that it is left uncertain whether any mechanical cause of obstruction existed in these parts. The emptiness of the heart, which was adverse to the theory of death by strangulation (asphyxia) Avas referred to the mechanical effect of gaseous putrefaction on the organ. The emptiness of the brain Avas left unexplained. It Avas inferred by most of the Avitnesses for the prosecution, that the marks of manual strangulation on the neck externally, and the usual appearances of asphyxia internally, had existed at the time of death, and that tliese appearances had been destroyed by putrefaction. Those Avho adopted this vicAv, contended that the protruded aye and tongue were conditions Avhich had resulted from strangulation alone, and that they could not be produced or removed by rapid putrefaction. The guilt of the prisoner rested chiefly on these two points. The facts shoAved, even alloAving no more than tAventy hours to haA'e elapsed betAveen death and the discovery of the body, the prisoner must have been cognizant of the death ; and, unless hopelessly insensible fi-om drink, Avhich appears to liave been disproved by the evidence, she Avould, it AA^as suggested, if innocent, liave given an alarm. She idtimately called to her son, and no reason can be assigned Avhy she did not call for assistance earlier. It was impossible to assume that she was speculating on the rapid decomposition of the body, and Avatching for the stage Avhen marks of violence would be obliterated. No motive could be assigned for the murder, nor for her remaining shut up in the same room Avith her husband, as it Avas alleged, for four or five days. Under these circumstances, Avith the admission by some of the scientific Avitnesses, that the protrusion of the eye and tongue might have been caused by putre- faction, the jury returned a verdict of not guilty. There was nothing to exclude the supposition that the deceased might have died in a convulsive fit from epilepsy, as a result of excessive drinking. In any case, it Avas obvious that the body had undergone rapid decomposition. The greater decomposi- tion observed in the head and neck might have arisen from the congestion of blood in the superficial vessels. As other causes besides manual violence may produce a congestion of the head and neck, the blackening of these parts in a highly-decomposed body furnished no medical evidence of homi- cide. The protrusion of the eye and tongue did not strengthen the theory of strangulation, since it Avas admitted by some of the medical Avitnesses that these conditions Avere consistent Avith the effects of putrefaction in an advanced staire. There was, therefore, no evidence of a medical nature to show that deceased had died by violence ; and, instead of draAving the inference that -^uch evidence had existed and had been destroyed by putrefaction, it Avould uve been safer to have said that the highly-decomposed state of the body revented any correct medical opinion from being formed. No opinion went the length of aflirming that death Avas necessarily produced by violence;


[138/1290 b21964944_0138.jp2]

PUTREFACTION. SUSPECTED STKANGULATIOX. 74 and the jury Avere properly informed by the learned judge (Baron Penne- tather) that they were not to convict the prisoner on probability, however strong, or on a mere preponderance of medical opinion. The medical evidence at this ti-ial raised the question whether a protrusion of the eye and tongue in a highly-decomposed state of the head and neck should or should not be regarded as an absolute proof of homicidal violence applied to the neck. One of the scientific witnesses affirmed that these states could not result from decomposition. Another deposed that they might result from gaseous decomposition taking place in the orbit; the gases thus confined would cause a projection of the eye and its coverings, while, in reference to the tongue, the effect of decomposition might be aided by the face being inclined downwards, and the mouth partly open. The fact that only o)ie eye was protruded, does not appear reconcileable Avith the effect of mechanical pressure on the neck, while it would admit of explanation by the theory that decomposition took place from effusion of blood or other causes more in one orbit than in the other. With regard to the tongue, whatever causes congestion of the head and neck, is likely to cause congestion of this organ ; and putrefaction, by the production of gas in its substance, may lead to its enlargement and protrusion. It is strange that the protrusion of the eye as a result of putrefaction should have been doubted, and even denied, by some of the witnesses at this trial. So conflicting was the evidence regarding this appearance, that Dr. Geoghegan made it a subject of experiment on the dead body of a child, and he observed that the eyes protruded, as a result of decomposition, on the eighth day; they began to present the appearance of protrusion on the fourth day. A case of rapid putrefication, in which both eyes protruded as early as sixteen hours after death, was reported by me in the ' Medical Gazette ' for January, 1850 (vol. 10, N. S. p. 17), see also ante, page 68. The time at which such an appearance presents itself after death, must obviously depend on the period at which gaseous putrefaction takes place in the orbits. Although, in the dead, the eyes are usually collapsed owing to transudation of the fluids, yet it has been pointed out by Orfila, that the lids may bulge forwards and the eyes protrude, from the production of gases within the cranium and orbits. Events frequently repeat themselves in medical jurisprudence, and the same medical theories are again brought into conflict under similar circum- stances. In December 1863, a trial took place at the Kingston assizes before Baron Pigott, involving questions almost identical with those which arose at the trial of Mrs. Byrne, at Dublin, in 1842 {Reg. v. Maliaig, Kingston Winter Assizes, 1863). On this occasion the body of a woman was found dead in a room in an advanced state of decomposition. The deceased and her lover, a soldier, had retired to a bedroom some days before, and had kept themselves there secluded: the soldier was found with his throat severely cut. This man was charged with the murder of the deceased, by strangling her with a rope, and the medical questions to be solved were: How long had she been dead ? and. Did she die from strangulation, or any other cause ? At the request of the Secretary of State, I attended the inquest and the trial on the part of the Crown, having made an analysis of the stomach in order to determine whether poison was present therein. Taking the two questions in their order, it may be observed that the medical evidence showed, that when the deceased was first discovered, on Friday, November 6th, at 6.30 a.m., she was lying on her back in bed, her body being covered with clothes as usual, the head and neck only being exposed. There was a pillow lying loosely over the flice. There was no rigidity, and the hands w-ere not clenched. The upper part of the body, including head, neck, and shoulders, was very much decomposed. The skin of the face was so black that the


[139/1290 b21964944_0139.jp2]

RAPID DECOMPOSITION. 75 features could not be described. The tongue was protruded and swollen. The lips were everted and blown up with gas. Gases escaped from between the tongue and lips Avith a slight hissing sound. The abdomen was enor- mously distended Avith gas, and at the lower part much discoloured. On opening the cavity the intestines protruded. The liver was in a putrefied state. On cutting into the skin of the chest a large quantity of air escaped : the lungs were found collapsed, and the heart was empty and contracted. Owing to the putrefied condition of the body, the head was not examined. From the blackened and decomposed state of the upper part of the body, the medical Avitness formed the opinion that death had been caused by violence, and he inferred that deceased must have been dead for some time. According to the evidence, the prisoner and deceased took the bedroom as a lodging at a public house on Tuesday, November 3rd. The deceased was seen on that night about nine o'clock, as Avell as the following morning, Wednesday, November 4. On the last occasion the landlady, who took the breakfast to the door of the room, saAV her face in bed. She was lying still, and, as she did not speak, the witness could not say Avhether she Avas then living or dead. It Avas observed, howcA-er, that of the breakfasts taken up, Avhich had been ordered for two the previous evening, only one Avas eaten. From that time deceased Avas not seen alive. The prisoner came doAvn stairs on Thursday morning, 5th November, at nine o'clock. There Avas nothing unusual in his appearance or manner. He asked to borroAV a razor to shave himself, but there Avas no razor in the house. Breakfasts were not taken up that morning; and the folloAving morning, Friday, November 6th, as neither appeared, the room Avas entered, and the body of deceased Avas then found as described. The prisoner AA'as lying on the bed Avith his throat severely cut: the Avound had obviously been inflicted some hours, and had bled a great deal. From the time deceased Avas last seen living (on Tuesday night), about sixty hours had elapsed. Considering that the Aveather Avas close and damp, and the body shut up in a small room, there was ample time for the putrefac- tive changes described, to have taken place; although such a degree of putre- faction is rarely seen until after the lapse of three or four days in Avarm damp weather. It Avas therefore an exceptional instance of rapid decomposition, like those elscAvhere described (page 67). As the prisoner alone Avas in the room Avith the deceased, he must have been cognizant of her death; and yet he gave no alarm. His statement was, that they had both resolved to die ; that they had purchased poison on Tuesday, the 3rd, and took it on the evening of that day, and that deceased died in his arms. In the afternoon, having left the room for a short time, he found on his return a cord round her neck, Avhich he removed. The highly-decomposed condition of the body Avas consistent Avith his statements ; for although one day might be sufficient for such changes, they are seldom witnessed in less than two days. This Avould place the death of the deceased on the night of Tuesday. The main question, hoAvever, Avas this : Had the deceased been strangled by the prisoner on that night, or did she die fi-om any other cause ? The putrefied condition of the body Avas consistent with either hypothesis, and it was a strong circumstance against him that he had remained in the room with the dead body. There Avas, however, an entire absence of motive for the alleged murder. The prisoner and deceased had been apparently happy together. No quarrelUng or struggling was heard at any time by the people of the house. There Avere no marks of violence on her person indicative of struggling or resistance. It Avas proved, as prisoner had stated, that the deceased had, on the 8rd Novem- ber, purchased at a druggist's, under a false pretence, a threepenny packet of Butler's vermin-killer. This contains about one grain of strychnia, mixed with soot and flour; and the paper Avrapper of this packet, Avith the empty


[140/1290 b21964944_0140.jp2]

PUTREFACTION. PRODUCTIOX OF 76 bag which liad contained the poison, was found in the prisoner's possession. Several letters written by the prisoner, one apparently at the dictation or with the cognizance of deceased, referred to their mutual intention to destroy themselves; and another, dated November 4, stated that deceased had taken poison and had died in his arms. With these facts there was strong reason to believe that the deceased had really taken the poison which she her- self had purchased, and had died from its effects. Assuming that muscular irritability had been exhausted by violent tetanic convulsions before death, and that the deceased had died in one of these convulsive fits with great congestion of the head, the rapid putrefaction and the blackening of the features from the decomposed blood in the vessels, would then be explained. The empty and contracted state of the heart was also consistent Avith this view. The stomach was examined chemically by the medical gentleman who was first called in to see the deceased. He found it empty, containing only mucus with some black particles the nature of which could not be defined. It was at first thought that it contained strychnia, but on making an analysis of the remainder of the stomach, and the spirit in which it had been preserved, I found that it contained no strychnia, and that the chemical results which had led to this conclusion were owing to the colouring action of sulphuric acid on bichromate of potash in contact with organic matter. In the state in which the stomach was brought to me, cut into two portions and macerated in spirit; it was impossible to determine whether it had originally contained starch or soot (the substances with which the strychnia in the purchased powder was mixed), or gin (the liquid in which the prisoner said the deceased had taken the poison). This negative result did not show that the deceased could not have died from the effects of a small dose of strychnia (half a grain) such as would be contained in one half of the packet which she purchased : for such a quantity might have been readily removed by absorp- tion, especially as the poison was taken on an empty stomach. The theory adopted by the medical gentlemen who examined the body was, that deceased had probably taken strychnia, but that, before the poison had had time to operate fatally, she had been strangled by the prisoner by means of a rope placed round her neck. This, in their judgment, would account for the contracted and empty state of the heart and lungs; they assumed that as the strychnia was in the system, it would prevent that accumulation of blood in these organs which is considered to be characteristic of death by asphyxia. Another suggestion was, that assuming strychnia not to have been taken by deceased, the empty condition of the heart and lungs might be accounted for by the effect of gaseous putrefiiction in the abdomen (page 50). A few ounces of bloody serum were found in the cavity of the chest, but no blood was present in the heart or great vessels connected with it. As the head was not examined, and the internal appearances of the chest did not support the theory of death by strangulation, it was sought to esta- blish this view by the external appearances. Here, however, the same difficulty arose as in the preceding case. The advanced state of decomposition in the head and neck rendered the medical conclusions, to say the least, unsafe. The facts relied upon, to show that deceased had died fi'om strangulation, were, 1. The black and decomposed state of the head and neck, compared with other parts of the body. 2. Certain marks found on the neck, at the upper part, and chiefly on the left side. 3. The peculiarly moist condition of the head and upper part of the neck, and the dryer appearance of the lower part, near the chest. 4. The enormous distension of the head, and the pro- trusion of the tongue between the lips. The first and third reasons assigned indicate not the cause of death, whether by violence, disease, or poison, but simply an advanced stage of the putre-


[141/1290 b21964944_0141.jp2]

MARKS RESExAIBLING THOSE OF VIOLENCE. 77 fiictive process, in a case in which death had taken place suddenly, and the conditions were favourable to putrefaction. The surgeon who first inspected the body found, on the day following its discovery, three marks on the neck, corresponding to three similar marks at the back part. There was no abrasion of the cuticle in front, nor any indentation or depression, but at the back the cuticle was peeling off, as the result of putre- faction, and serum exuded from it. On removing the integuments there was no appearance of escape or coagulation of blood beneath ; and this is generally found in death from strangulation. The cellular tissue was much blown up with air (the gases of putrefaction). At the adjourned inquest before the coroner, while the facts were recent, the Avitness had thus described the appearances on the neck: ' On the external surface of the neck, there were two or three indistinct marks, most distinct on the left side. On removing the skin, there was not the least escape of blood, but here and there, the miiscular tissue was more discoloured than the remainder.' Another witness, associated with this gentleman, who saw the body twenty-four hours later, described the marks as consisting of two or three lines of dark discolouration. There were no signs of violence beneath the marks, but the structures were of a darker colour below. Pie further stated that there Avas much blood in the subcutaneous tissue, from the chin to the chest; and on the arms there were apple-green streaks from putrefaction in the course of the blood-vessels. The protrusion of the tongue was referred by both, not to putrefaction, but to mechanical pressure on the neck as a result of strangulation. A long clothes-line was found in the room, under the bed. This was proved to belong to the landlady, who stated that it had been lying a long time in the room, before it was let to the prisoner and deceased. On it was one small spot of coagulated blood, as if from a wound, and some long female hairs. When these were compared with some taken from deceased's head, there Avas found to be no resemblance. It Avas suggested for the prosecution, that this rope had been employed by the prisoner as the instrument of murder. My evidence on this part of the case, the cause of death, was to the effect that, as the deceased Avas not seen in the act of dying, any medical opinion of the cause of death must be speculative, that there was nothing inconsistent Avith death from strychnia as alleged by the prisoner, Avhile there Avcre no medical facts on Avhich the hypothesis of death from strangulation could he safely based. The internal appearances, so far as they Avere observed, Avere more consistent Avith death from strychnia, than Avith death from strangula- tion, a fact admitted by the tAvo medical gentlemen Avho ascribed death to homicidal strangulation; that the non-detection of strychnia in the body Avas not inconsistent Avith the fact that a small but fatal dose had been taken by deceased; that a rigid state of the limbs in a dead body, Avould not be found Avhere putrefaction had advanced to such a degree as in this case. Further, the external appearances did not prove that violence sufficient to caiise death by strangulation had been applied to the neck of the deceased. The marks of discolouration on the neck, Avith the protrusion of the tongue, might have arisen from extreme putrefactive changes. Had the marks on the neck been produced by the application of a cord, such a degree of violence as would have caused the tongue to protrude Avould have produced indentation and depression of the soft parts of the neck, Avith an effusion of blood in the course of the depression, and a ruffling or abrasion of the skin. On this part of the case it may be observed, that there Avas no protrusion of the eyes; that the tongue was not indented or bitten by the teeth, and the hands were not clenched as in death by violent strangulation. It Avas suo-o-ested by counsel that strangulation might have been produced by otiicr andless violent means than by the use of the rope, and the slight


[142/1290 b21964944_0142.jp2]

POST-MORTEM CHANGES IN THE BODY 78 appearances thereby produced, might have been obliterated by putrefaction. It was admitted that this might happen, but there were no medical facts on which such an opinion could be based. The appearances were all consistent with putrefaction in an advanced stage, without resorting to the assumption that any violence Avhatever, sufficient to cause death, had been done to the neck. In the defence, it was urged that the prisoner and deceased had agreed jointly to take away their own lives: this was proved by the letters and their conduct. Deceased herself had purchased poison for this purpose, and had taken it, according to the prisoner's statement, on the evening of the day on which she procured it. Everything in the case was consistent with the theory of volun- tary suicide, and of an attempted suicide by the prisoner in a state of despair. The powder containing the poison had disappeared, while the j^aper bag in which it was sold, remained. In his charge to the jury, the learned judge observed that the great question for them to decide, was whetlier the prisoner had any part in the death of the deceased. If they were of opinion that her death Avas caused by the rope, and by his act, then their verdict must of course be wilful murder. If they thought that death was caused by poison, then they would have to consider whether the deceased took the poison without any participation on his part, in aiding and abetting her act, and if she did, then they must acquit him. But if, in their judgment, the two agreed together to take poison, and took it together, and she died, and he survived, then their verdict must be also wilful murder. The jury adopted this view, and found that the prisoner Avas guilty as an accessory before the fact, i.e.., that he was not guilty of murder by strangulation, but that he aided and abetted deceased in the voluntary act of self-murder. The two medical gentlemen, while expressing their strong belief that death had been caused by strangulation, very properly admitted in cross-exami- nation, that they would not swear that deceased had not died from strychnia or some other causes; and one of them stated that his reason for thinking that strychnia had not caused death was, none could be detected in the body. This, of course, was equivalent to affirming that unless some portion of an alka- loidal poison, whatever the quantity taken, remains unabsorbed in the stomach, death could not be ascribed to poison. This is not consistent with experience in such matters, and so far as this particular case is concerned, could not in the least degree affect the question whether deceased had or had not died from strangulation. It is obvious that a person may take a dose of strychnia, and yet, by the act of another, die from strangulation before the poison has been wholly absorbed, or before a quantity sufficient to cause death has pene- trated into the blood. The discovery of some portion of stiychnia in the stomach would not prove that the deceased had not been strangled, and its non-discovery, therefore, could not be taken as a fact in favour of death from strangulation. In short, this form of violent death should be clearly and con- clusively established by medical facts, independently of the administration of poison. Here the cause of death was simply based on medical belief or proba- bility ; not on absolute certainty, which alone w^ould justify a jury in comino- to the conclusion that murder had been thus deliberately perpetrated. Ac- cording to the prisoner's statement, the rope was really around the neck of the woman on Tuesday night, and he removed it. Assuming that the coloured marks on the neck arose from mechanical pressure, and not from putrefaction, it becomes a question whether the rope may not have been thus iised by deceased, in attempting to strangle herself, or by the prisoner in aiding and abetting her in the attempt. Such a degree of pressure might be made on the part of the neck where those marks were found, without causino- death and this would account for their presence, without renderinsr it neccssnry


[143/1290 b21964944_0143.jp2]

79 CAUSED BY PUTREFACTION. to suppose that murder by strangulation had been perpetrated. The description does not convey the idea that it Avas impossible for deceased thus to have produced them, or that they could not have been produced without necessarily causing death; and thus there was literally nothing to support the hypothesis of murder but medical conjecture. It was stated in evidence, by one of the medical gentlemen, that if strychnia had been taken and death subsequently caused by strangulation, this fact would account for the absence of the usual appearances of asphyxia in the heart and lungs, i.e., that strychnia would operate by producing a contracted and empty state of the heart. Some questions on this point were put to me by the learned judge, in answer to which, I stated that no case of this compound character had, so far as I knew, occurred, or been recorded, but that on general medical principles, if, after taking poison, a person underwent strangulation, there was no reason, quoad the poison, why the usual appearances of strangulation should not be found in the heart and limgs. The poison being in the body, would not prevent the appearances which attend a sudden form of violent death ; and although a contracted and empty state of the heart may be found in numerous cases besides death from strychnia, it is reasonable to infer that if the action of the poison had proceeded so far as to cause the emptiness and contraction of the organ, it had gone far enough to cause death, thus rendering it unnecessary to resort to any other hypothesis. From all the facts of this case, it is in the highest degree probable that deceased took a portion of the powder containing strychnia on Tuesday evening, November 3rd, and that she died from its effects in the course of the night; that when her body Avas found, she had been dead more than two days; that the prisoner aided and abetted her in the act of self-murder; that he was cognizant of her death, and was for at least two days in the room with her dead body, Avithout giving any alarm or calling for assistance ; that he may or may not have taken part of the poAvder, but that in accordance Avith their mutually-expressed intentions, he had attempted to destroy himself by inflict- ing a serious Avound in his oAvn throat. The Avound was not of that slight nature Avhich is observed in woimds self-inflicted for the purpose of concealing or masking crime. He had lost much blood, and Avas depressed and faint Avhen found. No suggestion Avas made in the course of the proceedings that deceased had died from natural causes; yet as the head Avas not examined, owing to its highly putrescent condition, it is obvious that those natural causes of sudden death Avhich operate by the brain, had not been excluded in this instance. Counsel for the defence might have suggested that a fatal attack of apoplexy Avould have accounted for death as Avell as for the congestion of the head and neck, and the consequent blackness of these parts owing to putrefaction setting in rapidly. . These tAvo cases Avill sen^e to shoAV that tlie changes produced by putrefaction in a dead body, may often involve questions of life and death, and that they require more attention fi-om the medical profession than they have hitherto received. In alleged child-murder, it has been generally considered that a highly putrefied state of the lungs prevents a correct medical opinion being formed of their actual condition at birth; and there are icAv Avho Avould venture to infer from experiments on such lungs, that a child had breathed after its birth. In reference to poisoning, Avhen, in any suspected case, the mucous membrane of the stomach and bowels has undergone extensive changes from putrefaction, it Avould be unsafe to rely upon the appearances as evidence of death from poison, although they might at first sight resemble those produced by irritants. The same caution should be observed in forming an oi)inion from the state of the skin when putrefaction is far advanced. The


[144/1290 b21964944_0144.jp2]

80 rUTREFACTION IX WATER. marks and discolourations which here take place, especially in parts of the body in Avhich the venous trunks and capillaries are congested from any cause at the time of death, are liable to deceive the examiner when death is attributed to violence, and he is searching for proofs of this. In another place (page 4G), I have quoted several cases of this description, and in one, according to the statement of Dr. Chvistison, a man appears to have been wrongly convicted of murder by strangulation chiefly because a broad blue mark was found in the front of the neck of the deceased. This Avas attributed to violence. There seems, however, to have been little doubt that it was due to post-mortem changes in the body. Putrefaction, unless advanced to the last stage, cannot entirely destroy marks of violence when attended by physical injury to parts, such as abrasions or lacerations of the skin, laceration or crushing of the muscles with fracture of the trachea or larynx, protrusion of the tongue, accompanied by marks of indentation or laceration by the teeth. In such cases, a safe medical opinion may be formed in spite of the decomposed state of parts; but it is otherwise with superficial marks unattended with mechanical injury. These are pre- cisely the appearances which occasion mistakes, as they may be really due to post-mortem changes, and not to violence. It is quite true that life may be destroyed by a slight degree of mechanical pressure, and the injury thus occasioned may be masked or obliterated by putrefaction. There is, however, this conclusion to be drawn: it is far better that a few cases of real homicidal violence should thus escape recognition, than that we should incur the serious risk of involving an innocent person in a charge Avhich on conviction Avould necessarily lead to capital punishment. Murder by strangulation is murder in its worst and most aggravated form. The act itsell" implies malice and deliberate design. If the body is not decomposed, we may act safely: if decomposition has advanced to a great degree, "whether generally or locally, it would be unsafe to base an opinion on superficial discolourations. Putrefaction in Water.—The process here takes place more slowly than in the atmosphere, owing to the" low temperature, and the free access of air being cut off. The skin covering the palms of the hands and tlie soles of the feet is found thickened, wdiite, and sodden from imbibition, wdien the body has remained several days in water. Owing to this cause, ecchvmoses result- ing from violence during life, are not ahvays apparent in a body recently removed from water ; it is only when the skin has lost the greater part of the water by evaporation, that ecchymoses and other marks of violence begin to show themselves. The influence of air upon the skin of a body, which has been for some days submerged, is chiefly seen, after its removal from water, in the face and chest. In a few hours, if the temperature of the atmosphere be moderately high, the face will commonly be found bloated, and either livid or black. The features are so distorted, that they cannot be recognized by those who knew the jierson during life. The change chiefly consists in the skin becoming first of a livid brown colour, and afterwards passing to a deep green. According to Briand, when putrefaction takes place in bodies which have been lying in water, the discolouration of the skin is first seen in the face and lower part of the neck. It then spreads successively over the shoulders, chest, and legs. In bodies exposed to air, the discolouration is first seen in the abdomen, and thence spreads to the chest, neck, face, and upper and lower limbs. These discolourations are chiefly apparent in those parts which are freely exposed to the atmosjihere. They are not commonly found on surfaces which have been in close contact, as in the armpits and upper and lower limbs, -where the former have been closely applied to the sides of the trunk, and the latter have remained in close proximity to oacli other. For


[145/1290 b21964944_0145.jp2]

EFFECTS OF PUTKEFACTIOX IX THE DROWNED. 81 tlio same reason the discolourations are not commonly met with at the back of the body, or on those parts which have been closely wrapped in clothes. Gaseous putrefaction takes place in bodies immersed in water, as well as in those which are exposed to air. The abdomen, chest, and cellular membrane beneath the skin are thereby distended: the body acquires buoyancy and rises to the surface. It requires but a very sliglit expansion of the cavity of the abdomen for this effect to follow, since the human body is only slightly heavier than its bulk of water. The position in Avhich a dead human body floats, is commonly with the abdomen or back on the surface, and the head with the upper and lower extremities depending. The bodies of females, it is said, are more commonly found floating with the abdomen upwards. The period of time required for a body to rise to the surface, from gaseous putrefaction, must depend on many circumstances. It is stated to happen usually from the third to the fifth day after submersion. The gases may be then liberated and the body sink ; they may be again generated and it will rise. The facts connected with the buoyancy of the dead body became of great importance in the trial of Spencer Cowper (1699), for the alleged murder of a female. (See Drowning.) If the dead body has been submerged for some Aveeks or months, or has remained long exposed before inspection, the skin Avill be found of a deep blue, black, or green colour, the muscles soft and discoloured, or the fatty parts may have undergone a transformation into adipocere (p. 65). Ultimately the soft parts will be washed from the bones and the skeleton separated. The changes from putrefaction, even when comparatively slight, may, as Casper justly remarks, seriously affect the value of medical evidence. The blood becomes decomposed, acquires a darker colour, and produces conges- tions in the brain, lungs, right side of the heart, and other parts of the body, so as to render it difficult to form a conclusion on death from apoplexy or asphyxia. (' Gerichtliche Leichen-Oeffnimgen,' vol. 1, p. 89.) The special researches on drowning made by Casper and Kanzler show that putrefaction of the bodies of the droAvned, generally commences at the upper part and extends downwards. Thus, after a few days, while the lower part of the body may be in a tolerably fresh condition, the face, head, neck, and upper part of the chest may present a reddish colour passing into patches of a blueish-green, first seen on the temples, ears, and nape of the neck, thence spreading to the face, and afterwards to the throat and chest. These changes may be observed in svimmer, when a body has remained in Avater from eight to twelve days, and in winter for a still later period. The head of a droAvned person is sometimes much discoloured from putrefaction, Avhen the rest of the body is in its ordinary condition. Casper considers that this inverted order of the putrefactive process may be taken as a strong indication of death from drowning (' Ger. Leich.-OefF.' vol. 2, p. 103); but while it may be admitted that attention should be given to this circumstance, it yet remains to be proved Avhether a dead body throAvn into water (Avhen death has taken place from asphyxia by suffocation or strangulation) would not undergo decomposition in a precisely similar manner. It is Avorthy of remark that the uterus resists decomposition more than other internal organs. In a case in Avhich the body of a female, Avho had been missing nine months, Avas foimd and examined, although all the other organs Avere completely decom- posed, the uterus was of a reddish colour,—firm in structure, and its parts Avere recognizable, so that Casper, Avho conducted the inspection, Avas able to affirm that the female Avas not pregnant at the time of her death. (' Ger. Leich.-Oeff.'-vol. 1, p. 93.) An attempt has been recently made by the aid of baths of chlorine, salt, and hydrochloric acid, as Avell as by injections of chlorine, chloride of zinc, and G


[146/1290 b21964944_0146.jp2]

DETERMINATION OF THE PEEIOD 82 sesqniclilovide of iron, to restore the features of a drowned person, so as to enable persons to speak to the question of identity. In the case referred to, the body had been an unknoAvn time in water. It was deeply discoloured: the face Avas black ; the lips, cheeks, and eyelids were greatly distended; and the nose scarcely visible. The effect of this chemical treatment, it is stated, Avas to diminish the tumefaction produced by gases, and to bring the face to a light clay colour. (' Lancet,' May 16, 1863, p. 551.) The intention of the operator (Dr. Kichardson) Avas to restore the expression Avhich the features had during life, that the Avitnesses Avho had seen a man charged Avith murder, and then missing, might be able to say Avhether the features Avere those of the missing man or not. They could not, howeA-er, recognize, in the restored features, any person Avhom they had ever seen before. The chlorine appears to have pro- duced a slight bleaching action, but Avhether the process was efficacious or not, in the restoration of identity, must be a matter of conjecture. This could be determined only by the testimony of persons Avho had really knoAvn the deceased and had frequently seen him during life. After such changes produced by putrefaction in the droAvned as are here described, it Avould be hopeleasto attempt to restore the expression of the features of the living man. It is one thing to arrest or prevent j^utrefaction by these agents, but another to suppose that these chemical changes can be reversed, and the corpse put in the position of a body recently drowned. It is highly probable that the most intimate friend of the deceased would liaA^e failed to recognize the body under such circumstances. Determination of the Period of Death in the Drowned.—Some attempts have been made to generalize on the phenomena of putrefaction in Avater, in order to enable us to say for how long a period a body may have been immersed. No satisfactory data, hoAvever, have been obtained to guide us in this enquiry. The changes which take place, are modified in their degree and the rapidity of their progress by numerous and often inappreciable causes. M. Devergie believes that he has obtained a certain series of characters Avhereby he can determine Avith sufficient precision, the length of time Avhich a dead body may have been in the water, supposing the drowning to have occurred during; the Avinter season. Thus according to him, in bodies immersed //-o??* thr-ee to > Jive days Ave shall find : cadaveric rigidity ; coldness of the surface ; no contrac- • tion of the muscles under the galvanic stimulus; and a Avhite or sodden appear- • ance of the skin of the hands. From foiir to eight days—Pliancy of all parts of i the body ; no muscular contractions under the galvanic stimulus ; natural ' colour of the skin ; cuticle of the palms of the hands A'ery Avhite. From eight r to tivelve days—The whole of the body fiaccid; the cuticle of the back of the ^ liands beginning to Avhiten; the skin of the face softened and pallid, differing: Irorn the skin of other parts of the body. About fifteen days—The face someAvhat bloated and covered Avith red patches ; a greenish tint in the middle of the sternum; the cuticle of the hands and feet perfectly Avhite, and: becoming raised in folds. About a month—Face of a reddish-broAvn colour ;; eyelids and lips green ; a reddish-brown patch surrounded by a gi-een border- on the fore part of the chest; the cuticle of the hands and feet Avhite, thickened, and coiTugated. About tti'o months—Face broAvnish-coloured and SAvollen; the hair becoming loose ; the cuticle of the hands and feet in great part detached; the nails still adherent. Two months and a half—Cuticle and nails of the fingers detached; that of the feet the same, but the nails still adherent. In the female there is a reddish colour of the subcutaneous cellular tissue in the cervical region, as Avell as of that Avhich surrounds the Avind- pipe and the organs contained in the chest; partial saponification of the cheeks and chin, superficial in the breasts, groins, and fore part of the thighs. Three months and a ///f//'—Destruction of part of the scalp, eyelids, and nose; partial saponification of the face, of the upper part of the rieck, and


[147/1290 b21964944_0147.jp2]

OF IMMERSION IN THE BODIES OF THE DEOAVNED. 83 groins; destruction of the integuments in different parts of the body ; cuticle of the hands and feet as well as the nails entirely detached. Four months and a /ia//—Almost complete saponification of the fatty parts of the foce, neck, groins, and fore part of the thighs ; the appearance of a calcareous incrustation or deposit on the thighs; incipient saponification of the fore part of the brain; opalescent condition of nearly the whole of the integuments; destruction and removal of the hairy scalp; the bones of the skull laid bare and beginning to become brittle. There are no data to give even approximative opinions for a longer period than this: and it is admitted that even these imperfect data are not available for determining the period of death in subjects drowned during spring and summer. There is a common belief that the dead human body is soon destroyed by submersion in water; but this is not borne out by experience. In those who are drowned during winter, and whose bodies remain long below the surface, or are covered with mud so as to prevent a free access of air, decomposition takes place slowly. Mr. Eager of Guildford communicated to me a case, in Avhich a man, net. 70, was missing from January 6 to February 4, 18G4. His body was found in a river, and there was reason to believe that he fell in and was drowned on the day he was last seen. The head, neck, and a portion of the chest, where unprotected by clothing, were thickly covered Avith mud. When this was removed, the features were perfectly recog- nizable, and although twenty-eight days had elapsed identification was easy. The only changes observed were as follows: the cuticle peeled away from the cutis when slight friction or pressure was made over those parts which had been covered with mud. The face and neck were somewliat darkened in colour, and the front part of the chest was marked with slight lines of lividity. There Avas no tumefaction whatever over any part of the body. The thickened skin of the hands and feet was corrugated and whitened by long-continued maceration, but remained firmly adherent to the tissues be- neath it. With these exceptions the body presented no appreciable alteration of appearance, nor any departure from that Avhich would be observed in a recently dead body. In 1857 I was consulted in the following case. Some parts of the body of an infant were found floating on the surface of water in a pit. There Avas the skull Avith the sodden skin upon it, but the brain, eyes, and ears had dis- appeared. The upper part of the chest and one arm were foimd. The soft parts appeared to enclose the bones, Avhich Avere quite loose and discoloured, but saturated Avith Avater. Some of the articular cartilages Avere still attached, although A^ery much soflened and easily separated. There Avere the remains of a woollen cloth in Avhich the body Avas probably Avrapped. It had been kept at the bottom of the water for some time by a heavy stone found there, Avhich Avas no doubt attached to the body. Upon these facts the questions submitted to me, in reference to a Avoman delivered of a child eighteen months previously, and suspected of murder, Avere, Avhether it Avas possible that a human body could remain so long a time as eighteen months in water, without being totally destroyed. Further, Avhether the action of Avater would not increase the bulk of the body, so as to make a ncAV-born child appear some weeks old. The ansAvers to these questions Avere:—1st. That a dead human body submerged is not necessarily destroyed in eighteen months ; and in reference to this case, it appears probable from the description that the body had been immersed for a longer period. 2. That in the early stages of gaseous putrefaction, the body may appear larger from general distension; but this stage had been long passed in reference to these remains. Although this was probably a case of infanticide, there were no data to determine Avhether the child had been placed in the Avater living or dead. G 2


[148/1290 b21964944_0148.jp2]

PKESUMPTION OP THE TIME OP DEATH 84 Mr. Harris, of Ivedruth, met witli a remarkable instance of the effects of water on the human body after submersion for the long period of twenty-six years. In 1828, a healthy muscular man a5t. 24, fell into the shaft of a mine, fifty fathoms deep, of which thirty fathoms consisted of water. The efforts to recover the body were unsuccessful. The shaft Avas closed over, and so it remained until April 1854, when the Avorking of the mine Avas resumed. The skeleton of the missing miner, with portions of the clothes which he wore, was discovered in one of the levels, in which there was water. The remains, as well as the clothes, buttons, and boots found on the skeleton, were identified by his brother. Mr. Harris found that all the soft parts, with the exception of a small piece of fatty substance, were destroyed, but the bones were firm and well preserved. There avas no muscle, tendon, ligament, or even cartilage about any of them. They were all detached from the joints. They Avere of a dirty broAvnish or almost black colour. The skull Avas full of a brown soft substance, Avhich Avas Avithout smell. There Avas nothing in the Avater calculated either to destroy the soft parts or preserve the bones. The water, as it ran from an adit leading from the shaft into Avhich deceased had fallen, had been long used by the inhabitants for domestic purposes. It Avas habitually drunlv by persons in the neighbourhood, and Avas considered to be very pure ! It is not often that any very precise opinion is required of a medical Avitness respecting the probable period at Avliich death has taken place from droAvning. A question has, hoAvever, arisen respecting the time required for the pro- duction of acUpocere in the droAvned, and on this has depended an important question relative to the presumption of survivorship. The property of a gentleman Avho had committed suicide by droAvning, Avas seized under a com- mission, and an action was brought to recover it at the WarAvick Lent Assizes, 1805, on the ground that the insolvent Avas dead at the time the commission Avas issued. The folloAving is an outline of the case :— The deceased, who was in a state of insolvency, lefl his home on the 3rd of November; and on the 12th of December folloAving, i. e. five Aveeks and four days after his departure, his body Avas found floating in a river near the place Avhere he resided. A commission of bankruptcy had been taken out against him a few days after he Avas first missed, and before it was knoAvn that he had destroyed himself. It became therefore important to determine Avhether he had droAvned himself (for there Avas no doubt of his having committed suicide) before or after the date of issuing this commission. If it could be shown that he Avas already droAvned Avhen it Avas issued, the commission Avoidd be void in laAv, and his property could not be seized under it. The litigation then turned upon the question, Avhether he had droAvned himself on the day of leaving his house, or at any time afterwards. The body was found floating Avith the head and feet submerged. On being taken out, the face Avas covered with a muddy slime. The body Avas discovered on a Wednesday, and a coroner's inquest Avas lield on the folloAving Saturday. On the Friday, the day before the inquest, three medical men examined the body Avith a vicAv to ascertain Avhether any change had taken place in it, Avhich could justify an opinion as to the time during Avhich it had been lying in the Avater. The muscles of the buttocks Avere found to be converted into a fatty substance, very much resembling suet (adipocere). The face Avas completely disfigured by putrefaction. The hair of the head separated from the scalp by a slight pull. The other parts of the body Avere firm and Avhite, Avithout any putrefactive appearance. The clothes externally seemed unchanged in any way ; but the ■ shirt and neckcloth Avere so rotten as to be torn by the slightest force. Mr. Dickenson, a medical Avitness for the plaintiffs, /. e. the relatives of i deceased, stated it as his opinion that the body could not have been less than i six weeks submersed. Three or four weeks would not have sufficed to pro-


[149/1290 b21964944_0149.jp2]

IX REFERENCE TO THE DROWNED. 85 cliice the appearances met with. He thought the adipocerous state of the body conld not have been brought about in less than six weeks. In cross- examination he admitted that he had met with an instance in which a body taken from the Severn had a spermaceti appearance within a shorter time, idtliough the change had not advanced so far as in this instance. Dr. Bree said that the parts of the thigh and abdomen were changed into a soapy iat or iidipocere. He supposed the body must have been under water for more than six weeks; he therefore thought the deceased must have been in the water during the whole time that he was absent. If it had been exposed to the. iiir it woiild not have presented the appearances met Avith. In cross-examina- tion he admitted lie had said that the body was in such a state, that it would be impossible to express an opinion. Dr. Gibbes stated that he had been for many years engaged in experiments on the production of adipocere, and had published the results of these in the ' Philosophical Transactions.' He had been able to procure a small quantity of adipocere from muscle by maceration in water for a month ; but in general, it required a much longer period for this transformation to take place. Upon this scientific evidence, the jury were of opinion, that the deceased was not alive at the time the commission was taken out, but that he had been dead for the Avhole period of his absence ; and the bankruptcy was accordingly superseded. In medicine as in law, there are always two sides to a question; and accordingly there appeared just as many medical witnesses for the defendants, i. e. the creditors, as for the plaintiffs. The case, prima facie, as we liave seen, Avas in favour of the plaintiffs. The state of the body supported this A'iew, although it might have been contended for the defendants that a few days more or less would liaA^e made no difference in the results, and that deceased might therefore have been alive when the bankruptcy was declared. The verdict of the jury Avas physiologically well founded. The general period required for the production of adipocere in drowned bodies, is stated by most observers to vary from three or four months to a year. Its occur- rence in a body to any extent, within five weeks and four days, must be regarded as an exception to an extensive series of observations. The witnesses for the plaintiff were then justified in assigning the longest possible period, that the circumstantial evidence would admit, for its production in tliis instance. The facts of this case shoAV that adipocere may be produced in the body of a drowned subject within a period of six Aveeks. The defendants Avished to make it appear that the adipocerous transformation might take place Avith much greater rapidity, but there Avere no facts to render this view ])robable, while there Avere many facts in support of the contrary opinion. One instance of its early production is related by Dr. Harlan, of Philadelphia. He had occasion to macerate the cranium of a fat negro in the su)nmer of 1824; it was placed in a barrel of Avater, and kept closely covered over. About six weeks aflerAvards he observed the head floating on the surface, and rather inclined on one side. The portion of the head Avhich floated above the level of the Avater was tumefied, and on cutting into it, the Avliole sub- stance, doAvn to the bone, Avas found converted into adipocere: but that portion of the head and face which was immersed in water, Avas in a putrescent state. It may be as well to compare the facts of this case Avith the rules laid doAvn by M. Devergie, for detemiining the period during Avhich bodies have remained in Avater. The deceased Avas an adult, and the droAvning took place during the winter season :—it is therefore a favourable ca?e for testing the value of these rules. M. Devergie fixes the earliest period for the production of adipocere at about tAVO months and a half: he then speaks of its commencing in the cheeks, chin, breast, groin, and fore part of the thighs. Here, hoAvever, in less than six Aveeks, the adipocerous change had taken place completely in


[150/1290 b21964944_0150.jp2]

PRESERVATION OF THE BODY. 86 the muscles of the lower part of the abdomen and of the buttocks. M. Devergie states that the hair of the scalp becomes loose in about two months: here it separated witli the slightest pull in six weeks. The data furnished by this medical jurist, would therefore tend to assign a much longer period of submersion than six weeks, to a body presenting the characters observed m this case. It is scarcely necessary to remark that rules of this kind can, however, only be regarded as remote approximations to the triith. Still, more recently, another case occurred, in Avhich the late Mr. Callaway informed me that he was required to give evidence respecting the probable period at which drowning had taken place, from the partial conversion of a body into adipocere. When a dead body is immersed in a liquid of a preservative nature, as in the water of a peat bog, the changes which take place are of a peculiar kind, and they render it difficult to arrive at even an approximate conclusion respecting the period of death. In July 1858, Dr. Barry, of Kanturk, Ireland, consulted me in reference to the following case. A male human skeleton was found near the surface of a peat-moss or bog. All the bones were detached, and were of a deep chocolate colour. The right femur had been accidentally fractvired obliquely by an instrument used by the peasantry in cutting turf. The skin and muscles were closely adherent to it. They Avere free from any unpleasant odour, and were completely tanned. The bones were destitute of phosphate of lime, and in consequence were as flexible as cartilage. Dr. Barry calculated by a comparative measui-ement of the thigh bone, that the stature Avas five feet seven inches. The sex was determined as usual, by the roughness of the bones, and the size and shape of the pelvis. There were no means of determining the cause of death. The skull had not been fractured. It Avas supposed that the person had been shot and the body deposited in the bog ten years previously, but Dr. Barry Avas of opinion that it might have been lying there fifty years. The removal of the phosphate of lime Avas a remarkable fact; it probably depended on the action of some acid in the Avater. Tannic acid was, no doubt, the agent by which the soft parts Avere preserved. CHAPTER 6. IDENTITY OF MUTILATED REMAINS CASES—EXHUMATION OF SKELETONS HUMAN AND ANIMAL BONES DETERMINATION OF SEX, AGE, AND PERSONAL PECU- LIARITIES—DETERMINATION OF AGE BY THE TEETH QUESTIONS OF PERSONAI, IDENTITY—EVIDENCE FROM FRACTURES, DISEASE, AND DEFORMITY. Identity of mutilated Bodies.—A dead body partially putrefied, may be found mutilated, and parts of it may be discovered in localities distant from each other. There is less difficulty here in making out identity, than Avhere only bones are discovered; for it is by no means easy to say Avhether certain bones belonged to the same skeleton or not. So long as the soft parts are attached to them, there Avill be no difficulty in forming an opinion. Those Avho commit murder, and thus dispose of a body, believe that identity must be entirely destroyed, if they only deposit the parts in remote places. In this respect, hoAvever, they are generally deceived : for satisfactory medical evidence may still be forthcoming. In the case of the Avoman Broivn, murdered by Greenacre in 1837, the head, trunk, and limbs Avere scattered in Avidely distant parts of London. The limbs Avere not found until six Aveeks after the trunk, and then at a considerable distance, and under very different circumstances! In the examination of the trunk, it was observed that the fifth cervical vertebra had been sawn through, leaving only about the tenth of an inch


[151/1290 b21964944_0151.jp2]

IDENTITY OF MUTILATED BOD IE?. 87 of that bone. When the head was found it was observed that the fifth cer- vical vertebra had also been sawn through, leaving only the posterior spinous process. On comparing the head with the trunk they fitted exactly, even to the continuation of a superficial cut on the skin. On afterwards com- paring the trunk Avith the legs, it was ascertained that the cut surflvces exactly corresponded. The thigh-bones remaining attached to the trunk, had been isawn through about an inch below the trochanters, to about one half of their thickness, and then broken off. When the limbs were discovered six weeks alterwards, the portions of thigh bones Ibund, exactly corresponded in the marks produced by the saw and in the portions broken. Not only were the parts of the body^thus proved to belong to one and the same female, but the individual was further identified by the peculiarity of the absence of a uterus. In a case of infanticide, which was the subject of a trial in 1839, the arm of a child was found concealed in a dust-hole of the house, while at about the same period, the body without an arm, and the head of a child, were found in a ditch at some distance from the house where the accused person was living. The identity was, however, distinctly made out by the fact, that the arm and scapula attached to it, fitted exactly to the trunk, and that the inci- sions through the muscles and vessels completely corresponded. On the occasion of a murder perpetrated at Brighton some years ago, the head and subsequently the body of a female were found in different and distant places. They were clearly identified as belonging to the same individual: first, from the fact that there were four cervical vertebra; attached to the trunk and three to the head; and secondly, from the divided vessels and cartilaginous rings of the trachea exactly corresponding. The importance attached to this kind of anatomical evidence, shoAvs that when a portion of a dead body is found, the whole of the parts which form the boundary of the section, should be attentively observed and accurately described. The case of Dr. Parkman for the murder cf whom Professor Webster Avas tried and convicted at Boston, United States, in March 1850, presents a remark- able instance of the value of scientific evidence, in establishing the identity of a mutilated body. It also proves that even all the refinements of science will fail in the attempt so to dispose of a dead body in a case of murder, as to pre- vent its identification. On November 23, 1849, the deceased, Dr. Parkman, was traced to the laboratory of the prisoner, and fi-om that date he Avas missing. A Aveek after his disappearance, there Avere found concealed, in the vault of a privy belonging to the prisoner's laboratory, a pelvis (the hip-bones), the right thigh (from the hip to the knee), the left leg (from the knee to the ankle);—and Avith them certain tOAvels bearing the initials of the prisoner, and being such as Avere used by him. Among some cinders and slag, connected Avith a furnace, Avere found portions of bones, apparently of the cranium, fragments of vertebra?, blocks of artificial teeth, and some gold which had been melted. On the day following, in a remote corner of the laboratory, there was found a tea-chest containing, imbedded in a quantity of tan and covered Avith minerals, the entire trunk of a human body, Avith the left thigh from the hij) to the knee. When the parts Avere placed in ai^position with the portions previously found, they corresponded, so that they Avere obviously parts of the same body. This observation also applied to the remains of bones (cranium and vertebrte) found in the slag of the furnace. There Avas no duplicate portion. All the fragments fitted so as to form part of the same human skeleton. The portions thus found resembled in every particular the body of Dr. Parkman, and in no single particular Avere they dissimilar from the body of the de- ceased. There Avere missing from these remains, when they Avere placed in apposition, the head, the arms Avith the hands, both feet, and the right leg from the knee to the ankle.


[152/1290 b21964944_0152.jp2]

88 RESTORATION OF MUTILATED REMAINS. The parts found (which are light in the engraving) were accurately examined by several medical gentlemen. They deposed that they were human remains, parts of one and the same human body of the male sex; that they had not undergone dissection for anatomical purposes, and had not been submitted to any process of preservation. Further, that they had been cut and hacked m dif- ferent directions without any reference to their anatomical relations, and evidently by a person only partially acquainted with the structure of the body. The chest was still covered with the muscles and skin. It was noticed, that under the left nipple, between the sixth and seventh ribs, there was an opening which penetrated into the cavity. The opening was slightly ragged, and about one and a half inches in length. It seems that Dr. Parkman was sixty years of age, and his stature was five feet eleven inches. The portions of the body thus restored, were those of a person between fifty and sixty years of age; and Avith respect to stature, the portions found, extending from the seventh cervical ver- tebra to the outer ankle (malleolus) measured 57-^ inches. The distance from the sole of the foot to the outer malleolus, measured in another subject Dr. Parkman's remains restored, of the same age, was 3 inches; and the distance Tiie missing parts are black. from the top of the head to the base of the sixth cervical vertebra Avas 10 inches. Adding these measurements to the missing portions, the total length of the body found Avould be 5 feet 10^ inches, being within half an inch of the stature of Dr. Parkman. There were marks of identity about the teeth and jaws which left no doubt that the remains Avere those of the missing gentleman (see page 106). An attempt had been made to destroy the skin and flesh of the chest, by the use of a strong solution of potash, but this had failed. The defence of the prisoner rested upon the facts that the charge was based entirely on circumstantial evidence, that the identity of the remains had not been satisfactorily made out, and that no cause of death had been proved. The jury, hoAvever, returned a verdict of guilty, and the prisoner Avas subsequently executed (see ' Keport of the Trial of Professor Webster' by Dr. Stone, Boston, 1850). A singular case involving someAvhat similar questions occurred in London in October 1857. I allude to the remains of a human being, found in a bag on one of the buttresses of Waterloo Bridge. It appeared that they had been accidentally deposited there the night previously—the intention of the person who carried them being, no doubt, to lower them into the river, but by accident they lodged on one of the buttresses of the bridge. A number of articles of clothing Avere in the bag Avith the remains. By an order from the Home Office these remains Avere submitted to the examination of Mr. Painter, the Divisional Surgeon of Police, and myself We found them to consist of parts of a human body, and obviously of the same body, as, Avhen alloAvance Avas made for the missing portions, they admitted of an accurate adjustment to each other. There Avere tAventy-three portions of the body discovered, consisting chiefly of bones Avith flesh adhering to _ them. The flesh had been roughly cut from the bones, apparently Avith a view to remove as much of it as possible, and to completely destroy the identity of the body. The parts had been cut and sawn into


[153/1290 b21964944_0153.jp2]

89 RESTORATION OF MUTILATED REMAINS. small lengths, probably to reduce their bulk and to allow them to be packed within a small space. The trunk, including part of the chest and spine, had been cut into eight pieces ; the upper limbs had been cut or sawn inio six, and the lower limbs into nine pieces. The hip and elbow joints were in a strongly Hexed condition. The missing portions, Avhich are marked black in the engravings, were the head, with the greater part of the spine, namely Waterloo Bridge remains restored. Front and back view of the Skeleton. Dotted lines showing where the bones were cut or sawn. Missing parts black. fourteen out of tvventy-foiir vertebrae (seven cervical and seven upper dorsal), the hands, the feet, and some portions of the left side of the chest. It will be observed that these were also the parts Avhich were missing in the case of Dr. Parkman. In fact, a murderer intending to destroy j^ersonal identity, would in general most effectually succeed in his object by removing the head, feet, and hands. The whole of the viscera of the chest and abdomen had also been removed. The twenty-three fragments found weighed only eighteen pounds. This is about one-eighth part of the average weight of the adult body. The questions which required solution in this ca.se were the following:—1. The fsex, age, and stature of the deceased; 2. The presence of any physiological or pathological peculiarities in reference to personal identity ; 3. The presence of any wounds or marks of violence, with reference to the probable cause of death ; 4. The general condition of the remains, with a view to determine whether they Avere parts of a dissected bodj'-, and whether they had undergone any chemical process for the purpose of preser- vation ; 5. The length of the period which had probably elapsed since the death of the deceased. The details of this examination will be found elsewhere 1('Med. Gaz.,' Oct. 31, 1857, p. 44-5). There was no difficulty in determining the sex of the deceased, as a portion of the sexual organs, Avhich liad been mutilated (not dissected), still remained att<ached to the pelvis. The long bones were in their full state of development. The stature was determined by taking the length of the portions found, and adding a certain numl)er of inches


[154/1290 b21964944_0154.jp2]

90 IDENTITY OP MUTILATED BODIES. for the missing skull, cervical vertebras, and feet. The bones had been sawn through near the joints with a fine bone saw, such as is used by- bone boilers. On the left side of the chest, between the third and fourth ribs, there was a stab which had penetrated the cavity, and which, if inflicted on a living person, would have been in a direction to enter the heart. The edjres of this wound were everted and wide apart, and the muscles around Ave're infiltrated with blood. It had those characteristics which are observed in Avounds inflicted on a living body. In Dr. Parkman's case there was a similar wound penetrating the chest on the left side between the sixth and seventh ribs (page 88). No portion of these remains had the appearance of having undergone dissection, or any preparation or iise for anatomical purposes. There was no injection of blood-vessels; the muscles, vessels, and nerves had been cut through, or rather hacked in all directions, without any reference to relative position. The spinal marrow had been violently torn out of the vertebral canal, and was left hanging by its sheath to the vertebrae. The joints had been sawn through, evidently with great trouble, at points where a scalpel, even in the hands of a young anatomist, Avould have speedily effected the separation of the limbs. Further, no preservative of animal matter had been employed. There was no trace of arsenic, corrosive sublimate, nitre, salts of alumina or chloride of zinc in the soft parts. Portions of the muscular fibre were brown and sodden; they presented the appearance of haA'ing been boiled in water and soaked in a solution of common salt, which was separated from them by crystallization. Portions of the skin, as well as the ligaments of the joints, had a similar appearance, i.e. of having been submitted to the action of boiling water. From the condition of the soft parts and joints, it appeared probable that the body had been cut up and exposed to a boiling temperature, Avhile the members were in a state of cadaveric rigidity. We considered that the boiling and the salting of the remains had been resorted to in order to prevent any offensive smell as a result of putrefaction, which might have led to their discovery. The interior of the right hip-joint, and the deep- seated portions of flesh around the joint, had escaped the action of salt and Avater ; and from the condition of these 2:)arts, as Avell as other circumstances, we formed a conclusion respecting the probable period at which this person had died. The conclusions from the whole of the investigation were as follows:— 1. That the remains were those of a person of the male sex, of adult age, and of at least 5 feet 9 inches in stature ; 2. That the parts found, presented no physiological or pathological peculiarities by which they could be identified as belonging to any particular individual. The only fact observable under this head was, that the portions of skin remaining, were thickly covered with dark hairs and that the deceased Avas probably a dark hairy man ; 3. That the remains presented no appearance of disease or of violent injury inflicted during life, Avith the exception of a stab in the space betAveen the third and fourth ribs on the left side of the chest. This stab Avas in a situation to peneti-ate the heart and to cause death. It had the characters of a stab inflicted on a person, either living or only recently dead; 4. That these remains had not been dissected or used for the purposes of anatomy. All those parts of the human body Avhich are useful to an anatomist, had been roughly seA'^ered and destroyed by a person, or persons, quite ignorant of their anatomical relations. They had been probably cut and saAvn before the rigidity of death had ceased, i.e. Avithin from eighteen to twenty-four hours'^aftei' death ; and in this state, had been partially boiled and subsequently salted (placed in brine). The body of deceased had not been laid out or attended to like that of a person dying from natural causes, Avhose body mio-ht be lawfuUy used for anatomical piirposes; 5. That the person of whose body these


[155/1290 b21964944_0155.jp2]

91 IDENTITY OF MUTILATED BODIES. remains were a part, may have been dead for three or four weeks prior to the date at which they were examined, namely, on October 21, 1857, The articles of dress found with the remains in the bag, were those of a man and a foreigner. They Avere much torn: some presented the appearance of stabs and cuts, while all were more or less stained with blood, some of the stains presenting coagula. A stab through the double-collar of an over-coat must have been inflicted with great force, as it was found to extend through corresponding parts of the under-coat and waistcoat. All these articles of dress had stains of blood on the inside, and chiefly on the left side of tlie body, in the parts corresponding to the stab on the lefl side of the chest. The cutting and tearing of the dress may have arisen from the removal of the clothes while the body was in a state of rigidity in a constrained attitude. The state of the clothes was consistent with their having been Avorn by the deceased when he Avas subjected to violence Avhich led to his death. From enquiries made by the police, there Avas reason to believe that tlie remains were those of a SAvedish sailor fi'om a vessel then in the river. It is believed that he met Avith his death by stabbing, and that after a short concealment, his body, cut up and mangled in the manner described, was disposed of by throAving it into the river. The head and other missing parts had probably been thus got rid of; and it Avas only by the accident of the bag lodging on a buttress of the bridge, instead of falling into the river, that these remains Avere found. As the deceased was most probably a foreigner, Avhose name Avas not known, and of whose personal appearance no description could be given, no clue has hitherto been found to the perpetratoi-s of this murder. In this respect it resembles several other murders of recent date, in Avhich the bodies have been discovered entire. In reference to these cases of mutilation, there is one point which requires a brief notice. When parts of dead bodies are found, a credulous section of the public commonly adopt the hypothesis, that some medical student has resorted to this method of disposing of parts of a dissected subject, in order to alarm the neighbourhood. Thus, in the case of Greenacre, there was a general dis- position to refer the first portion of the mutilated remains Avhich Avere discovered to a Avanton act of this kind. The erroneousness of this vicAv Avas proved only by the subsequent discovery of the corresponding parts of the dead body and the detection of the murderer. So in reference to the case of Dr. Parkman, the mutilated remains, were at first described as anatomical preparations ! Such an hypothesis is of course highly favourable to the escape of criminals, and is eminently prejudicial to the course of justice. It points out to the assassin an easy method of deceiving the public; and it shoAvs that if he only mutilates a corpse by removing and destroying the head, hands, and feet, leaving the remainder of the body to be discovered accident- ally, he has a far better chance of escaping detection and punishment than by attempting to conceal the entire murdered body. The Waterloo Bridge case formed no exception to the protection, thus unintentionally extended by public opinion to a foul act of murder. Any one acquainted Avith anatomy and the dissection of bodies, Avould at once perceive from the description, that no portion of this body could have been used for such a purpose. Medical students do not, as part of their anatomical pursuits, hack and mangle a dead body so as to destroy muscles, vessels, nerves, and spinal-marrow; they have no occasion to make aAvay Avith all those parts by Avhich a body may be identified, or to boil and salt the remainder: they do not receive corpses for dissection Avith their clothes, nor is there any conceivable reason .Avhy, if they did, they should produce cuts and stabs and stains of blood on the clothes Avith such accuracy as to correspond to the effects of Avounds inflicted on a living man ! It Avas suggested that no murderer Avould have secreted the


[156/1290 b21964944_0156.jp2]

92 EXHUMATION OF SKELETOXS. clothes with the remains. It is difficult to speculate on the proper course which should have been pursued by men, who are fresh from the perpetration of an atrocious crime, and who are anxious to conceal it, but this may be fairly said : the bajj of clothes with the remains was loAvered over the bridge Avith a view that it' should fall into the water and be carried away by the tide : it was owing to mere accident that it was found in the situation described. The head and other parts had no doubt been already successfully disposed of by a similar proceeding. The identity of the bodies of soldiers and sailors has been sometimes established by the existence of marks on the skin, such as anchors, stars, initials, &c., indelibly impressed in the structure by colouring matter. It is not often that a question arises whether a portion of a body found is that of a human being or of an animal. In 1838 that which was at first supposed to be a human hand, was found in a dust-bin in the City. It Avas alleged that a murder had been perpetrated, and an enquiry took place at the Mansion House in reference to the supposed atrocious crime. Some doubts were raised whether the relic produced \vas really the hand of a human being. In order to have these doubts removed, it was sent to St. Thomas's Hos23ital for the inspection of Mr. Solly and other medical gentlemen, Avhen it j^roved to be the fin or paddle of a turtle ! Exhumation of Skeletons.—It occasionally happens that medical investiga- tions are required to be made so long after interment, that all the soft parts of the body are destroyed, and nothing but the entire skeleton or a few bones may be discovered. In either case numerous important questions may arise affecting identity as Avell as the mode of death. Indications of murder or violent death may be obtained long after the entire destruction of the soft parts. Briand relates the case of a female, whose body Avas disinterred in 1833, after eleven years' burial. It Avas believed and alleged that she had been murdered, and her body afterAvards buried by her murderers. This was found completely reduced to a skeleton, but nevertheless the third, fourth, fifth, and sixth cervical vertebraj were still held together by a dark coloured mass derived from the decomposition of the fleshy parts of the neck ; and this mass AA^as still surrounded by several folds of a cord, AA'hich had been employed as the means of strangulation. Proof Avas thereby obtained of the mode in Avhich the murder had been perpetrated. It was also possible to determine the length and colour of the hair, the state of the teeth, and the form and length of the bones. A ring Avas found on the bones of one finger Avhich left no doiibt Avhatevcr of the identity of the deceased. In 1829, a man named Guerin was condemned at the assizes at Versailles for the murder of his brother. The murder had been perpetrated on the 21st August, 1825, and the body had been buried in the corner of a damp cellar. The exhumation of the remains took place three years after interment, and it Avas ascertained by inspection that the deceased had been destroyed by bloAvs on the cranium Avith a bruising instrument of large surface, and the identity of the deceased Avas clearly made out by the disposition of the teeth, the malformation of the vertebral column, and the curved form of the bones of the legs. All these facts Avere deposed to by Avitnesses. The case of Eugene Aram., although of old date, also furnishes an instance of the necessity for closely examining skeletons Avhen it is suspected that the indi- viduals have died from murderous violence. This man conspired Avith another to murder a person named Clarke. The deceased suddenly disappeared, in Febru- ary 1745, and his absence could not be accounted for. In'l758, i.e. thirteen years after his disappearance, some bones Avere accidentally discovered in a cave near the toAvn Avhere he lived. Aram's accomplice Avas arrested on suspicion : and, losing his presence of mind, Avhen charged with the mm-der, he denied that


[157/1290 b21964944_0157.jp2]

93 SEX, AGE, AND IDENTITY OF SKELETONS. those were the bones, but mentioned the spot -where the bones of Chirke were buried. A skeleton was there found, and the traces of a fracture and indenta- tion of the temporal bone were plainly perceptible. The manner in which the murder was committed, was confessed by the accomplice, and the medical evi- dence corroborated this confession. Aram, who was a man of some aliility, argued in his defence, that it was impossible to identify a skeleton after the lapse of thirteen years ; that the fracture of the skull and the piece of bone beaten in- wards proved nothing; that it might have lain long in the cave where it was found, which had been a hermitage, and therefore a likely place of sepulture; and that the appearance of violence to the skull, might have been produced in times of disorder, Avhen, in searching for treasure, the graves and coffins of the dead were violated. He also positively denied the conclusions as to the sex of the skeleton ; but this objection was entirely set aside by the medical evidence. In spite of the ingenuity of this defence, the facts were too strong against him, and he was convicted and execiited. Aram's defence throws some light upon the questions of doubt which are apt to arise when evidence is given from the examination of exhumed bones. Thus, for example, Ave find three points strongly urged, involving the con- sideration of the time required for the destruction of the skeleton and therefore of its identity ; of the form, situation, and appearance of a fracture of a bone, so as to enable a medical witness to determine whether it be of recent or of old standing, and whether it Avas likely to have been caused by accident previously to or during the exhumation, or had arisen from the direct application of violence to the skvdl during life. Lastly, a clear determination of the sex may be required from an examination of the bones. This, of course, is material to identity, and therefore one of the first circumstances to which a medical witness should direct his attention. Mr. Perfect has reported a case which shows the importance of attending to sex in exhumed skeletons. Two brothers lived together in a farm in the neighbourhood of London. The younger of the two Avas dissolute and irregular in his habits, so that they lived very tmhappily together. One winter's night, Avhen the ground was covered Avith J^oav, the younger brother absconded from the house by letting himself down from his chamber Avindow; and Avhen he was missing the ensuing morning, his footsteps were clearly traced in the snoAV to a considerable distance, but there Avere no footsteps of any other person. Time passed on, and nothing Avas ever afterAvards heard of the missing brother. The elder brother left the farm, and it passed into tlie hands of a stranger. During the progress of some alterations in the grounds surrounding the house, a skeleton Avas dug up. It was immediately con- jectured that the one brother had murdered the other; an investigation Avas called for, and an inquest Avas held. Mr. Perfect, Avho Avas not summoned as a witness, requested permission to examine the bones. Having disposed them in their natural order, he found that they represented a person of shoit stature; and from the obliteration of the sutures of the skull, and the Avoru state of the croAvns of the teeth, he inferred that they must have belonged to an aged person. On examining the bones of the pelvis, it Avas perceptible that they had belonged to a female. When this fact was communicated to the jury, the tAvo medical men, Avho had given their opinions fi-om a hasty examination, were sent for, and one of them immediately corroborated the statement that the skeleton had belonged to a female. The proceedings Avere of course at an end, and a heavy suspicion, amounting to a charge of fratricide, Avas thus removed from an innocent man. On further enquiry, it was ascertained that the bones had been removed from an old gravel-pit, •where gipsies had been accustomed to assemble, and occasionally bury their dead.


[158/1290 b21964944_0158.jp2]

94 EXAMINATIOX OF EXHUMED BONES. From the examination of many reported cases in which medical evidence has been required on these occasions, I find that the circumstances to whicli enquiries have been especially directed are the following: — 1. Whether the bones are those of a human being, or of some animal. 2. If of a human being, whether they belonged to a male or a female. Having thus far established their identity as part of a human skeleton, some subordinate questions may arise respecting them. 3. The length of the period during which they liave probably remained in the ground. 4. The probable age of the individual to whom they belonged. If the upper and lower jaws be found, we shall derive much assistance in solving this question by an examination of the teeth. 5. The probable stature of the individual when living. 6. The race to which he belonged : thus we must not confound the skeleton of tlie Caucasian -with one of the negro variety: for, from the mixed nature of our population, even this may become a material question in relation to the guilt or innocence of an accused person. We are then bound to examine these bones for certain special characters, the ob.servation of which may be necessaiy to throw a light upon the general evidence ; while inatten- tion to them or a misinterpretation of them at the time of examination, may lead to the defeat of justice, and to the censure of the medical witness. 7. It will be proper to determine whether solitary bones belong to the right or left side of the body, and whether they form parts of one, or of more than one skeleton. 8. Whether they have sustained any mechanical injuiy during life, i. e. whether at any antecedent period they have or have not been fractured ; and if a fracture has existed, whether this has occurred during life or by acci- dent diu'ing the exhumation : if during life, whether it be recent or of old standing. 9. The presence or absence of personal deformities, the presence or absence of supernumerary fingers or toes, of a curvatm-e of the spine, of a cur- vature of the bones from mollities ossium, or of anchylosis of one or more joints. 10. Murderers sometimes attempt to make away Avith their victims by burning the bodies: it may be therefore proper to determine whether the bones have or have noL imdergone calcination. This especially applies to cases of infanticide. Sometimes but a very small portion of the foetal skeleton can be procured for the formation of a medical o2:)inion. Other points of circumstantial evidence also demand attention—the position of the bones when discovered in the ground, whether lying at full length or gi-ouped together confusedly. In all bodies which have undergone Christian burial, the skeleton is found lying at full length, with the head to the west and the feet to the east, and one skeleton may be found below another. By an attention to these points, the locality has been at once identified as the site of a bm-ial-ground, Avhere bones have been discovered during excavations for the foundation of new buildings. This inference is confirmed when the bones of persons of all ages and of both sexes, are found in or near the-same spot. In ancient times, the body was consigned to a stone chest in a sitting posture, with the arms clasped about the knees. Thus, in these graves, the skeleton has been discovered with the thigh bones folded on the chest. It is not unusual to find human mixed Avith animal bones. I have procured from a deep grave in an old cemetery, the bones of a horse mixed with the bones of the male human skeleton. Occa- sionally, in ancient times, this animal was killed and buried Avith his deceased owner : and probably the disinterment of these bones, in old burial grounds has given rise to the fables of giants. In one cemetery in the vicinity of London, the bones of the horse Avere frequently found, when the excavation was carried to a great depth. The bones of the ox have also been met with in graves mixed Avith human bones. I have in my possession the upper part of the thigh bone of an ox, which Avas dug out of a deep grave in a country


[159/1290 b21964944_0159.jp2]

95 IDENTITY OF SKELETONS. cluirchyard : it was forwarded to me as an unusually developed thigh bone of a Iniman being! Identity is sometimes strikingly made out by the presence or absence of the teeth, by their form, position, worn appearance, and the number that may be deficient: and if absent, whether removed long before death. The examina- tion of the teeth often aids considerably in the determination of the age of a skeleton. The discovery of certain articles of clothing, known to have belonged to a missing person, in association with the bones of a skeleton, will sometimes remove any doubts that may have arisen on the subject of identity. Metal buttons, brooches or rings, are imperishable, and should be sought for by sifting or washing the earth. In Reg. v. Platts (Derby Lent Assizes, 1847), prisoner was charged with the murder of a man named Collis. The deceased had not been seen alive since December 7th, 1845. On August 28th, 1846, some men in cleaning out a cesspool in the neighbourhood, found some human bones with certain articles of dress, which were siipposed to be those of the missing man. Besides the ribs, there were two thigh bones, and two leg bones. The flesh readily came off the bones and fell into the soil. With these remains, there was the ordinary dress of a man, namely, coat, hat, trousers, and neckerchief, including two garters, one red and one white. These were still around the bones of the legs. A medical witness, Mr. Walker, stated that he had examined the bones, and found them to be those of a male lunnan being, from twenty-three to thirty years of age. All the bones were complete excepting a few belonging to the neck, and three ribs. On examining the skull, he found a deep fracture in the region of the forehead five inches in extent. There was another fracture over the left eyebrow, and a third across the base of the skull. These fractures, in his opinion, were inflicted on the living body. The other bones, which appeared to have been separated by the yielding of the ligaments as a result of putrefaction, presented no marks of violence. The injuries to the skull were produced by some cutting or sharp- edged instrument. They Avere sufficient to cause death, which might have taken place either immediately or after some time. The clothes were identified as those worn by the deceased at the time of his disappearance, and the white and red garters found round the leg bones were identified by a ■woman who made them, and presented them to the deceased. The prisoner was connected with the act of murder by a chain of circum- stances. On December 7th, he was seen with a hammer in his hand quarrelling Avith the deceased. At a later period, he Avas seen with tAvo other men pushing deceased, who appeared to be in a stupefied state, into his shop. On the night foUoAving ■ he was seen Avith two other men carrying a heavy substance in a sack, in the direction of the cesspool, Avhere the skeleton Avas afterAvards found. The prisoner had made false statements respecting the transactions betAveen himself and deceased, and the watch and boots of the deceased Avere traced to his possession. The deceased had been seen Avith the Avatch up to Avithin half an hour of his disappearance. Mr. Macaulay, for the defence, contended that there Avas not sufficient proof in law that the remains found, were really those of Collis. The finding of some portion of the clothes of this man in the cesspool Avas not sufScient to prove the corpus delicti—the murder. There must be positive evidence that the remains were those of Collis. Patteson, J. overruled the objection, observing that the identity of the remains Avas altogether a question for the jury. It Avas further contended for the defence, that there must not only be clear proof that the remains were those of the deceased, but it must be proved that the deceased had died by the act of the prisoner, and not from any accidental cause. The prisoner Avas convicted. But for the discovery of the clothes, more particularly of the tAvo different coloured garters round the leg bones, the identity in this ca?e could not have


[160/1290 b21964944_0160.jp2]

9(5 EXHUMATION OF SKELETONS. been satisfactorily established. The suggestion that the deceased might have fallen into the cesspool by some accident, was negatived by the fact that had this occurred, the watch and boots would have been found with the remains, whereas these articles were clearly traced to the possession of the prisoner. It is worthy of note that in this case, the dead human body, in clothes, was reduced nearly to the state of a skeleton within the short period of nine months. This must be ascribed to the influence of the putrescent animal matters by Avhich it was surrounded. That the bones had not been for a longer period in the place where they were found, was proved by the fact that the cesspool had been cleared out only a short time before the disappearance of the deceased. In July 18G3, the bones of a child Avere found in a nursery ground at Islington, under suspicious circumstances. It appeared that a girl named Elizabeth Hunter, aged eight years, had been missing from the neighbourhood since March 30th, lt)62, and it was important to establish, if possible, that these were the bones of a female child of the age of the deceased. Until the skull Avas Ibund it was supposed that the bones were those of a dog, but their human character appears to have been ultimately established by the discovery of the skull with some hair, and also of the lower jaw. The medical witness at the inquest assigned the age at from eight to ten years, but could not well define the sex, as at this early period the sexual differences on the pelvis are not well marked. The articles of clothing Ibund with the body served, however, to establish the sex, as well as the identity of the bones with those of the missing child. The remains had the appearance of having been longer in the earth than sixteen months, but it seems they were only superficially covered, and this might account for the rapid destruction of the bones and soft parts. It is probable that the bones of young persons decay more rapidly than those of adults. Cases involving medico-legal questions on the exhumation of skele- tons after various periods of interment Avill be found in the 'Annales d'Hygiene'for 1834, 1, 117; 183G, 1, 214; and 1845, 1, 379. See also ' Friedreich Ueber die Knochen in forensischer Beziehung. Ausbach,' 1853. Human and animal Bones.—The greatest ignorance prevails among the public on this subject. The bones of horses, cows, dogs, and sheep are fre- quently mistaken for those of human beings. In an antiquarian collection of relics obtained from a neighbouiing Roman castrum, I saw, some years since, the tibia of a dog carefully labelled and z-ehgiously preserved as a bone of an ancient lioman. The same collection contained fragments of bones of various animals, carnivorous and herbivorous, all marked as human relics; this collection belonged to an antiquary who had preferred adopting his own view of the nature of the relics, to taking the opinion of any one acquainted with anatomy. Even well-informed men may be easily mistaken on such subjects. Belzoni, the celebrated traveller, brought from Egypt, with his sarcophagi, a number of bones taken from the interior of the pyramids, which he pronounced to be the bones of King Cephrenes, and of some of the Shepherd kings. The late Mr. Clift, of the Eoyal College of Surgeons, informed me that by the request of a friend, he Avent doAvn to examine them after they had been submitted to public exhibition, and he found that they Avere nothing more than the bones of oxen ! The osseous relics of saints, as they are col- lected and presei-ved in glass and crystal cases in Roman Catholic countries, often present anomalies Avhich Avould surprise an anatomist. Supernumerary ribs and vertebraj are not uncommon, and intermixed Avith them I have seen bones Avhich certiiiuly never appertained to a human being. I mention these jacts because they shoAv the importance of entrusting the examination of bones ia all judicial enquiries, to Avell-educated medical men. The loAver classes of society are ever ready to suspect murder Avhen bones are exhumed; and it will not always be easy to satisfy them that the exhumed bones could not have belonged to a human being.


[161/1290 b21964944_0161.jp2]

97 MISTAKES RESrECTING IimiAN BONES. The lamentable effects of popular ignorance were displayed in a case that occurred at Damascus in 1840, which at the time excited great public notice. A Koiuan Catholic priest, with his son, suddenly disappeared in the early part of that year, and a strong suspicion arose that they had been murdered. Certain Jews were charged with having murdered the father and son for horrible purposes. The sewer in the quarter of the town in which they lived was examined, and some bones were there found. These were pronounced by the persons who discovered them to be human bones; and the discovery was considered to confirm the suspicion of murder which had arisen. Several of the accused Jews died under the tortures to which they were sub- jected. It seems that the state of anatomy was so low in Syria, that there was no one competent to solve the question whether these were really animal or human bones. Some persons who inspected them, pronounced that they must have been lying in the sewer for a great length of time, and that they had belonged to an animal. A proposition was then made that the bones should be packed in a box, and forwarded to the Parisian Academy of Medi- cine, for their decision. I believe it was subseqviently clearly proved that they were animal remains. Such a case is not likely to occur in England, for there are few professional men who would not be at once able to pronounce an opinion even from the examination of a fragment. It will be, in most cases, easier to say whether a particular bone has formed part of a human skeleton or not, than to determine to what animal it may have belonged; this is commonly all that is expected from a medical witness. A moderate acquaintance with osteology will enable him to give an affirmative or negative opinion: but where part only of the shaft of a bone —as of the humerus, radius, tibia, or fibula—is produced, some caution is required in forming a judgment. It will not be necessary in this place to describe all the peculiarities of human bones, but rather to point out certain well-marked difl^erences which are observed to exist between the bones of man and animals. With respect to the skull^ the foramen magnum in all animals, exfcept the ape-tribe, is placed very far back, and has its posterior edge tiu-ned upwards. In the ape-tribe, and especially in the ourang-outang, it is nearer to the centre of the base of the cranium than in any other animal, and is moi'e nearly on a level with the plane of the base of the skull. All animals, including the ourang-outang and ape-tribe, have two bones in the face, in addition to those found in man. The.se are situated between the superior maxillary bones, and are called ossa intermaxillaria, or, from their holding the incisor teeth, the ossa incisoria. The .suture which separates them from the maxillary bones becomes obliterated in some of the.se animals at an early period; but still traces of it may be plainly seen. To speak of the facial angle as a mark of distinction is quite unnecessary; a medical opinion can never be required except in those cases where only one bone, or the fragment of a bone, is presented for examination. The lower jaw in animals is destitute of a protuberance corresponding to the chin; it is also longer, in proportion to the cranium. The condyles of the jaw vary in shape according to the nature of the food. The trunk calls for no particular remark. The vertehrce are strikingly distinguished by their form, and by the direction of their spinous and transverse processes. Their bodies are longer, and deeply grooved laterally, in a vertical direction. The sacrum is generally narrower in proportion than in man; it is wide in those animals which occasionally stand erect, as in the ape and the bear, but it is in these animals longer. The pelvis is in all cases much elongated, is narrower, and has less of a basin-like appearance, the level of the brim having a much greater obliquity than in man. The thorax of animals without clavicles is commonly compressed at the sides, so H


[162/1290 b21964944_0162.jp2]

rECULIAE CHARACTERS OF ANBIAL BONES. 98 as to render it mucli deeper from the sternum to the spine. This is especially observed in the dog, cat, bear, and in long-legged animals. The ribs, or fragments of ribs, might perhaps be occasionally confounded. Most mammalia ])0ssess more ribs than are found in man, the number corresponding to that of the dorsal vertebra). The ribs vary much in form, but in herbivorous animals they are generally broad and thick ; in the bear and dog they are more rounded. The sternum or chest-bone of the ourang-outang soniewhat resembles that of man ; it is flat but narrowed, and the division of its pieces is more apparent: in all other animals it differs in being considerably narrower, more or less of a rounded form, and in being evidently composed of many moveable pieces. Most quadrupeds want clavicles: they exist in the ape tribe, and very much resemble those of man, so that the clavicle of the ape might be easily mistaken for that of a young child : in the dog and cat, there is a clavicular bone suspended in the muscles. The scapula or blade-bone of animals, including the ourang-outang and ape, is much longer in propor- tion, and is more equally divided by the spine, the fossa infra-spinalis being much smaller in proportion than in man. The os humeri, or arm-bone, of animals, is observed to become short as the metacarpus is elongated: in the ape tribe, it very closely resembles that of man. In apes the bones of the fore-arm have the same general appearance as in man ; but the two bones are long and slender, and the radius is as long as the ulna. In all carnivorous animals, the olecranon is extended farther back, and is more irregular than in man. The carpus, or Avrist, in apes, has one bone more than in man. The size and strength of the thumb are much greater in man than in any animal. Even in the ape tribe, although separate and opposed to the other fingers, the thumb is very small and much shorter than in the human species. The OS femoris, or thigh-bone, in most quadrupeds is so short that it scarcely projects beyond the abdomen : it varies in length according to that of the metatarsus. The neck of the thigh-bone is remarkably short, but the great trochanter rises considerably above the head of the bone even in the ape-tribe. In some animals, as in the horse, the trochanter ends in an unciform process projecting above the head of the bone. In the ourang-outang, the thigh-bone is straighter than in man, while in the bear it closely resembles the human bone. The bones of the leg in the ourang-outang are nearly as in man, but the tibia, or leg-bone, is in general considerably longer than the os femoris. In the bear it preserves a proper proportion. In the ape-tribe, these bones are nearly of equal length. In the dog, the fibula is placed behind the tibia, and is attached to it in its lower half. In the horse, the fibula forms merely a kind of splinter anchylosed by age to the upper part of the tibia. In the ruminantia, the fibula is wanting: in the pig it is anchylosed to tl>e tibia throughout its whole length. In apes, while the great toe is shorter than the rest, the smaller toes are much longer than in man. In none of the mammalia, except man, does the foot rest completely on the ground. The os calcis generally wants the tuberosity of the heel; but this exists in the ape-tribe, although to a less extent than in man. Such are the most prominent differences usually assigned by anatomists to the bones of animals, and based on the observations of skeletons. It is not improbable, however, that in some cases, assistance may be derived from the iise of the microscope. This instrument may be especially serviceable in those cases of difficulty in which an opinion may be required from only minute fragments of bone. The Haversian canals and bone-cells (lacuna)) exist in all classes of animals which have a bony skeleton ; and it has been shown that the bone-cells differ in size in the four great classes of animals They are smallest in birds, and largest in reptiles: in the mammalia they occupy an intermediate position. In fish, they are entirely different in


[163/1290 b21964944_0163.jp2]

99 DETERMINATION OF SEX IN SKELETONS. nppcarance from those existing in the other three classes. These bone-cells are sjiid to be of the sjime size in the s<ime class: thus, among mammalia, they are no larger in the bones of a horse, than they are in those of a mouse. In human bone, the cells are sometimes almost triangular in outline, at other times they have more of a linear or elongated shape. Their number is in an inverse proportion to the Haversian canals in bone. It is desirable that further observations should be made on this subject; and that differences in the microscopical structure of bone should be sought for in the human subject, and in the various orders of mammalia. The late Mr. Quekett ascertained that the cells of bone bore a certain relation, in point of size, to that of the blood-discs of an animal; thus, for instance, the blood-discs were found to be largest in reptiles, smallest in birds and mammalia, while in fishes, they were of an intermediate size : and he further discovered that the bone- cells followed the same law. ('Med. Gaz.,' Dec. 11, 1846.) It has happened on several occasions of late years, in cases of infanticide, that great difficulty lias been experienced in identifying small portions of bone, when the skeleton has been found partially consumed by fire. When it has been clearly proved that the bones are not those of a human being, this branch of the inquiiy is at an end. Detennination of Sex in Skeletons.—The determination of the sex from an examination of the skeleton or of certain detached bones, can be made only in subjects which have passed the age of puberty; for sexual differences in the skeletons are scarcely apparent until adult age has been reached. I have, however, seen the well-marked sexual differences of the pelvis in the skeleton of a boy of eleven. The skeleton of the female is smaller and more slender than that of the male. The full-grown bone of a female, is distinguished fi-om that of a male, by its ridges, depressions, and processes being less marked,—the shaft is smoother and more polished, while the articular sur- faces are flatter. The skull of the female is more contracted in front, and forms a longer oval from before backwards. The chest, which is naturally shorter, smaller, and less prominent than in the male, is somewhat wider about the fourth rib: it then contracts somewhat below, so that while the general shape of the chest approaches to an oval in the female, it is conical in the male skeleton, being wider at the base or lower part. The form of this cavity is often flattened laterally to a considerable extent, owing to the pres- ."sure of the stays worn by females. This altered condition of the ribs by pressure, may serve to indicate the sex. The sternum is shorter, terminating opposite the fourth pair of ribs, but its upper portion is larger than in the male; in the latter it terminates opposite the fifth pair of ribs. The ribs are shorter, more slender, and less arched, and take a more horizontal course in tlie female: their upper and lower borders are sharper. The false ribs are jiroportionately larger; and the cartilaginous portions of the true ribs are longer than in the male. The shoulders are lower, and the scapulo-humeral articulations nearer to each other. The clavicles are more slender, more round, and pass in a more straight direction to join the acromion processes. In the male they have somewhat the form of the italic S: they are flatter, larger, and run more directly backwards. The female scapula is thinner, snialler, flatter, and has sliarper angles than that of the male. The bodies of the vertebra? are smaller, the hole for the spinal marrow and the foramina are larger; and the lumbar vertebra; have greater length than in the male. An The upper limbs are shorter, the carpu? smaller, and the metacarpus and phalanges are more slender in the female than in the male. The thigh-bones have a greater curvature forwards at the upper part, and are turned more obliquely inwards, below. The neck of the thigh-bone in the female, h2


[164/1290 b21964944_0164.jp2]

100 SEX IN SKELETONS. PERIOD OF INTERMENT. forms nearly a right angle with the shaft, whereby the trochanter major is brought more nearly on a level with the head of the bone. In the male the neck of the femur is inclined obliquely upwards, and the trochanter major is below the level of the head. In the female the internal condyles are larger. The bones of the leg are more slender, and those of the feet are smaller than in the male. The most remarkable difference is obsei-ved in the jnlvis, and it is by an examination of this portion of the adult skeleton, when it can be obtained, that the sex may be most satisfictorily made out. In the female the ossa ilii are flatter and more everted, giving to the whole pelvis a greater capacity; the OS sacrum is broader, and turned more backwards; the os coccygis more .slender, moveable, and turned more backwards, the space between the ossa ]uil)is larger, and the cartilage of the symphysis, broader. The angle formed l)y the rami of the ossa pubis with the symphysis is larger. In a well-formed male skeleton I have found the angle to be 73°, while in a well-formed female skeleton the angle was equal to 90°. The tuberosities of the ossa ischii are flatter, and at a greater distance from each other. The brim of the pelvis is wider and of an oval form, corresponding Avith the head of a child, and the longest diameter extending between the ilia, or transversely. In the male the brim is more circular, and the greatest diameter is between the ])elvis and sacrum. The foramina ovalia in the female are wider, and approach more to a triangular form than in the male, one sharp angle being at the junction of the pubis with the ischium; the acetabula are farther distant from each'other. The pelvis of the female loses some of its well- marked sexual characters in advanced life. It will be understood that these differences are for the most part relative, and some are so slight that they can scarcely be regarded as characteristic of the sexes. Gi-eat difficulty in forming an opinion Avill exist in those cases where only a fragment of a bone can be prociired; but a medical witness is not expected to work out impossibilities: if he has a sufficient portion of a skeleton before him, he may be able to determine the sex, otherwise it Avould be advisable to state that the remains produced did not enable him to answer the question, and that the bone or a fragment might have belonged either to a male or a female. In a contested case of presumption of surAavorship Avhicli occurred some years since, it became necessary to determine the relative Aveights of the adult male and female skeletons. A perfect male skeleton from Guy's Museum, Avas found to Aveigh ten pounds, six ounces: and a perfect female skeleton eight pounds, thirteen ounces. The bones Avere completely diy. It may be observed that bone is the heaviest part of the human body ; its specific gravity is 2'01. Period of Interment.— One of the first questions asked on the disinterment of bones, relates to the length of the period during Avhich they may have remained buried in the ground. The period at which the bones begin to inidergo decomposition, Avill depend upon that at Avhich the soft parts have entirely disappeared. The common opinion is, that the soft parts are destroyed in ordinary graves in about ten years. Bernt, hoAvever, mentions a case seen 1)y Navier, in Avhich some fleshy parts of the body remained after an interment ol" tAvcnty-one years. The changes in the bones are observed to commence by the loss of animal matter, so that they become lighter; externally they acquire a dark incrustation Avhen in contact Avith the earth. This dark incrustation is sometimes confined to the surface; but in some very ancient bones in my possession, the osseous ^ell is of a dark-broAvn colour throughout like oak. The animal matter is never entirely lost; it exists in bones which have been buried for many centuries, and may be made evident by digcstiu" them in hydrochloric acid. Even in sawing them, the heat of frictiou°brin"-s


[165/1290 b21964944_0165.jp2]

DETERMINATION OF AGE IN SKELETONS. 101 out a peculiar animal odour. The shaft of a long bone becomes, after long buriiil, very brittle; it may be easily broken, and cut or scraped with a knife. It appears to me to be impossible to assign with any approach to precision, the period required for the production of these changes; they A^ary with the age of the subject, taking place more rapidly in the skeletons of the young : they vary also Avith the nature of the soil in which the bones are buried, according to whether this is dry or humid, sandy, cretaceous, or argillaceous. Some have alleged that the bones of a person buried in an ordinary coffin are entirely destroyed, Avith the exception of the skull and thigh-bones, Avithin a period of thirty years; but I have seen a perfect skeleton of the body of a male that had been buried in a dry soil for thirty-four years (p. 61); and there are many cases on record, where the skull and long bones have been found, in ordinary graves, quite perfect after a much longer period than thirty years. In general, the lower jaw of adults is presei-A'ed lor a great length of time, and Avith it the teeth, which fi-om the hardness of the enamel resist decomposition longer than any other parts of the body. The ultimate destruc- tion of the bone is effected by the complete disintegi-ation of its earthy parts, the phosphate and carbonate of lime falling into and mixing Avith the earth around. Bones owe their preservation to the large proportion of mineral mattter contained in them. This is greater in the adult than in the child. Von Bibra found the foUoAving proportions per cent, of mineral matter in bones of different ages:—In a woman (^t. 62), 69"82 : in a man (set. 25), 68'97 : in a child (set. 5), 67*80 : in a child of tAvo months, 65'32 : in a fostus of seven months, 65'19 : and in a foetus of six months, 59"62. The propor- tions in the bones of animals, are similar to those of the human adult. On the discovery of one or more bones, the question may be: Can it have been buried for a longer period than fifteen or tAventy yeai-s ? Suspicion may arise that it Avas the bone of a person alleged to have been miu'dered, and Avho Avas known to have disappeared about that period. In some cases this question may admit of a ready ansAver. If it Avere the long bone of an adult, and it Avas found to be light, friable, brittle, and easily scraped to poAvder, it is probable that it had been interred for a nuich longer period than that supposed. We can form only a rough opinion of the period of interment of bones, by the presence or absence of the soft parts; of maiTOAV in the interior; by the firmness and Aveight, or brittleness, diyness, and lightness of the bone. Even these remarks can scarcely be made applicable to bones preserved in durable coffins; for in this state they are removed to a great extent from all the common causes of chemical change. Devergie states that the bones of King Dagobert were found in a tolerably perfect state at Saint Denis, although they had been buried in a vault twelve hundred years. It is a question Avhich has yet to be determined, whether, as it is stated to be the case Avith the fossil remains of animals, human bones after long inter- ment may not contain a larger proportion of fluoride of calcium than when recent. It has been ascertained that the ancient bones of extinct animals contain a large proportion of the fluoride, Avhile in recent bones the pro- portion is so small that it requires a large quantity of bones to determine its presence. It need hardly be observed, that these medico-legal questions arise only in those cases where the bones have been found in an unusual locality, as in the cellar of a house or in a garden: and it Avill ahvays be proper to make further exploration to see Avhether the bones of different persons may not be found lying near. Determination of Age in Skeletons.—In regard to the remains of the young, the age may be best determined by an examination of the jaws and teeth, although the skeleton of the young is characterized by the smallness of the


[166/1290 b21964944_0166.jp2]

102 AGE INFERRED PROM THE TEETH. bones. If the jaw of a child can be found, medical evidence may be given of its probable age. In a case of alleged infanticide, which occurred in France, there were found among the exhumed bones of two children, parts of the jaws, containing the rudiments of the molar teeth, which appear about the eighth or ninth month of pregnancy. This fact showed, Avhat was rather important to the enquiry, that the child to whom the jaw belonged must have been born at or about the fiill period. It may be alleged that the bones are those of a child which has been murdered; but the medical witness may be able to prove, by an examination of the jaws, that the bones must have belonged to a child older or younger than^ that which is missing. There are numerous other cases in which a question ol this kind may become important. The determination of age by an examination of the bones of young sub- jects, is by no means so satisfactory as by the observation of the teeth. The alveolar cavities which contain the teeth are said to be formed about the sixth month of uterine life. At birth the rudiments of the whole of the temporary teeth, and of the anterior permanent molars, are formed in capsules within the gums; and about this period, the fangs of the incisors begin to appear. Great difference of opinion exists respecting the time at which the temporary teeth begin to rise above the gums in a child after birth. According to Mr. Bell, these teeth appear in the following order:—The four central incisors in from five to eight months; the four lateral incisors in fi'om seven to ten months ; the lour anterior molars in from twelve to sixteen months ; the fovu' cuspidati in from fourteen to twenty months; and the four posterior molars in Irom eighteen months to three years. The temporary are known from the corresponding permanent teeth by their much smaller size, by the absence of bicuspides, by the fact that the fangs diverge at a greater angle Irom the molars; and there is another and remarkable point of difference, according to INIr. Saunders, namely, that the enamel at the neck is collected into a kind of ridge, instead of terminating, as in the permanent set, evenly on the fang. This is especially apjmrent in the incisors and cuspidati, but, as Mr. Saunders ha? remarked, it applies to all the temporary teeth. Between six and seven years of age, the jaws contain forty-eight teeth—twenty of the temporary set in a perfect state, and twenty-eight of the permanent set more or less deve- loped and placed behind the temporary teeth which they are to replace. According to Mr. Saunders, the order in which the permanent teeth appear is as follows:—At seven years of age, the four anterior molars; at eight years,, tlie four central incisors; at nine years, the four lateral incisors; at ten., the four anterior bicuspides; at eleven., the four posterior bicuspides; at from twelve to twelve and a half years, the four cuspidati; and at from twelve and a half to fourteen years, the four posterior molars: thus making the total number of teeth in the jaAV at this period twenty-eight. The dentes sapientiaj seldom make their appearance before the age of eighteen, and often not xuitil a much later period in life. In general, the teeth of the lower jaw make their appearance before those of the upper. Some irregularities may occur in the periods at which the teeth appear; but according to numerous observations made by Mr. Saunders and others, the description just given, is applicable to a large majority of cases, and is sufficiently cori-ect for practical purposes. In addition to the examination of the teeth, medical jurists are accustomed to rely upon the progress of ossification in the skeleton, as furnishing evidence of age at the early periods of life. At one year, ossification commences in the lower extremities of the humerus and ulna, in the heads of the femur and humerus, and in the upper cartilage of the tibia. xVt two years, ossification takes place in the lower cartilage of the radius, and in the tibia and fibula. At two years and a half, it takes place in the greater tuberosity of the head of


[167/1290 b21964944_0167.jp2]

CHANGES m THE BONES. IDENTITY FKOM THE TEETH. 103 the humerus, in the patella, and in the lower ends of the four last metacarpal bones; a.t three years, in the trochanters; at four years, in the second and third cinieifbrm bones of the tarsus; at four and a half years, in the small tuberosity of the head of the humerus, and the upper cartilage of the fibula; at six years, the descending ramus of the pubis meets the ascending ramus of the ischium. At from eight to nine years, the upper cartilage of the radius becomes ossified. At nine years, the ilium, ischium, and pubis, meet in the cotyloid cavity to form the pelvis. At ten years, ossification begins in the cartilaginous end of the olecranon ; at twelve, in the os pisiforme of the carpus ; at thirteen, the three portions of the ossa innominata still admit of sejjaration into ilium, ischium, and pubis, although nearly united ; the neck of the femur is ossified. At fifteen, the coracoid process is iinited to the scapula; and between fifteen and sixteen, the oleci-anon to the ulna. From eighteen to twenty, the epiphysis at the upper end of the thigh-bone is joined to the body of the bone; as well as those belonging to the metacarpus, metatarsus, and phalanges. At tiventy, the upper and lower epiphyses of the fibula, as well as the lower epiphysis of the femur, are respectively united to the bones. At ticenty-five years, the epiphyses of the stei-nal end of the clavicle, and of the crista ilii, are united to the bones. This account of the progress of ossification may be taken as a representation of average results. In the cavity of the skull of young subjects, the furrows produced by the convolutions of the brain and by the vessels, are commonly very strongly marked on the bones. When ossification is once completed, it is diflJicult to determine the age by an examination of the bones. That the person has reached adidt age, Avill be indicated by the union of all the epiphyses to the bones, by the great firm- ness and solidity of the bones, with their rough surfaces for the motion of mviscles, their well-marked processes, grooves, and foramina. In the jaws, avc may expect to find the dentes sapientije; while the other teeth will probably be found much worn, although this last sign is not of any great importance. The lower jaw forms a great angle, being somewhat of an elliptical fonn, and is strongly contrasted with the semicircular shape of the jaw at an early period of life; the sutures are also closed, and are found in some instances nearly obliterated. The bones of an old person are generally lighter than those of an adult of the same size, the medullary cavities of the long bones being larger. The bones lose that ivory-looking character which they have in adults, become yellow from the quantity of oil which they contain, more earthy, and brittle. Those parts of the skeleton which are cartilaginous in adults, are commonly more or less ossified in old age. The bones of the cranium arc thinner ; the sutures entirely disappear, first on the inside, and then on the outside of the skull. The teeth have either dropped out, or the crowns are worn away to the sockets. Sometimes no trace of alveolar cavities is to be seen, the lower jaw being a mere rounded bone, with a smooth surface on each «ide. Identity from the Teeth.—Observations carefully made on the state of flu; jaws and teeth may have an important bearing in cases of disputed identity. The loss of particular teeth, the presence of supernumerary teeth, or the entire absence of teeth for a long period, may, if noticed by the medical inspector, lead to the removal of many difficultiee in the identification of skeletons. An instance of this kind occurred to me »ome years ago in a case which Mr. H. Keynolds and myself were called upon to investigate. It was a trial for murder under circumstances in which the body was never discovered, and in Avhich, as it happened, an important question of identity arose, founded on the presence of the incisor teeth in a female of advanced age. The ease to whicli I allude is that of Elizabeth lioss, who was tried at the Old Bailey


[168/1290 b21964944_0168.jp2]

IDENTITY FROM THE STATE OF THE TEETH. 104 Sessions in December 1S31, for the murder of a female of the name of Carohne Walsh. It appeared in evidence, that the deceased, Caroline Walsh, who was an old Irishwoman, had been repeatedly solicited by the prisoner to come and live with her and her husband, but the deceased refused. By much persua-. sion on the part of the prisoner, however, she at last consented, and went for that purpose to the prisoner's lodgings in Goodman's Fields on the evening of August 19, 1831, taking v/ith her, her bed and an old basket, in which she was accustomed to sell tape and other articles. From that evening all traces of the deceased were lost; and when the prisoner was required by her relatives to account for her disappearance, she prevaricated, but finally asserted that deceased had gone out early on the morning of that day, and had not returned. The testimony of the prisoner's son, who was the chief witness for the Crown, went to prove most clearly, that the deceased had been wilfully suffocated on the evening of her arrival, by his mother (the prisoner) placing her hands over the mouth of the deceased, and pressing on her chest. He deposed that on the foUoAving morning he saw the dead body of the old Avoman lying in the cellar of the house, and on the evening of the same day, he saw his mother leave the house with something large and heavy in a sack. This was at the time when murders were perpetrated in London to supply the Anatomical Schools with subjects for dissection. Now it happened most singularly that on the evening of August 20, the day following the alleged murder, an old woman of the description of the supposed deceased, Avas found lying in the street in the immediate neighbour-; hood, in a completely exhausted condition, and in a most filthy and squalid state. On being questioned she stated that her name was Caroline Welsh, and that she was a native of Ireland. Her hip Avas found to be fractured, in con- sequence of Avhich she was conveyed to the London Hospital, Avhere she subsequently died and Avas buried. The prisoner Ross, Avhen apprehended, insisted that this was the female Avhom she Avas accused of having murdered. Hence, setting aside the direct contradiction giA^en to this statement by the evidence of her son, it became highly important for the ends of justice, that the identity or non-identity of the tAvo AA^omen should be clearly established. The extraordinary resemblance of names, and the exact coincidence of time and place, struck every one in court; but by the examination of about twenty Avitnesses, the folloAving points of difference Avere elicited. It Avas proved that they were both Irishwomen, but Caroline Walsh came from Kilkenny; Caroline Welsh, from Waterford. The former (the alleged murdered per- son) Avas eighty-four years of age ; tall; of a sallow complexion ; grey hair, and had (an extraordinary circumstance for her years) very perfect incisor teeth. The latter, Caroline Welsh (Avho died in the London Hospital) was about sixty years of age; tall of statiu-e ; dark like a mulatto, but had no front teeth, in addition to Avhich it Avas deposed by a medical witness that the alveolar cavities corresponding to them had been obliterated for a considerahle tihie. The AAatness brought the skull and jaAV into Court,—for the body had been purposely exhumed for this examination ;—but the judge (the late Lord Denman, then Recorder of London) Avould not alloAv it to be produced, and said he would be satisfied with the witness's statement respecting the condition of the jaAvs. ^ Other circumstantial points of difference were deposed to,—as, for example, Caroline Walsh Avas healthy, cleanly, and neat in her person, and her feet were perfectly sound. Caroline Welsh was considerably emaciated ; she Avas in a dn-ty and filthy condition; her hip was broken, her feet Averc covered Avith bunions and excrescences, and one toe overlapped another.


[169/1290 b21964944_0169.jp2]

105 INFERENCES FROM THE ABSENCE OF TEETH. The dress of tlie two women was somewhat similar. That of Caroline Walsh •was most clearly proved to have been sold by the prisoner Ross to dilFerent persons; and almost every article was reproduced in Court, and sworn to by witnesses. The clothes of Caroline Welsh were proved to have been burnt by order of the parish authorities. Both of these women had similar baskets in their possession; that of Caroline Walsh had no lid or cover, Avhile that ibund on Caroline Welsh had. Lastly, the body of the latter was taken up from the burial-ground of the London Hospital for the purpose of identifica- tion, and it was sworn by two of the grand-daughters of Caroline Walsh not to be the body of their grandmother. This is perhaps one of the most singular cases of disputed identity that has come before a British Court of law. We have a coincidence of name, time, ])lace, age, occupation, and circumstances, so extraordinary, that but for two circumstances it is probable the prisoner would have escaped on the presump- tion of a mistake, the body of the deceased never having been found, althougli all the dissecting-rooms in London were repeatedly searched for it. These circumstances were—1st. That the relatives of the deceased swore that the exhumed body was not that of the missing woman; and 2nd, the medical proof of the entire obliteration of the alveolar cavities in the jaw of the exhumed body, proving that the incisor teeth must have been lost long before death, Avhile ^several witnesses testified to the presence of these teeth, as a striking peculiarity in the missing woman. Even had the features of tlie exhumed body been obliterated by putrefaction, the non-identity would have been established by this medical fact. The prisoner was convicted and executed. In February 18G4, a man named Weekly Ball was charged with the nuirder of a woman named Lydia Atlee, with whom he had cohabited. It appears that, while in the last stage of pregnancy, she had suddenly disappeared on July 22, 1850 and was never seen again. It was rumoured that she luid been murdered, and the prisoner who, it was alleged, had a strong motive for getting rid of her, was suspected of the act; but no legal proof could be obtained against him, and the matter dropped. On February 3, 18G4, as a labourer was digging in a lane, by the side of a ditch near the village of Ringstead, in Northamptonshire, where deceased and the accused had lived, he found a human skull and ultimately a skeleton, lying at full length Avith its face downwards. The medical evidence at the magisterial enquiry was to the following effect: The skeleton was lying in a trench about twenty inches below the surface of the ground in a swampy soil. The feet were close together, the heels touching each other. From these fiicts Mr. Leete, the surgeon, expressed an opinion that the body must have been buried naked. The skeleton when laid out, was that of a middle-aged female, about, five feet two inches in height. The bones were complete, excepting the right thigh- bone and skull, which were broken in their removal. He considered that the skeleton had been in the earth li-om twelve to twenty years. The woman Avas fiir advanced in pregnancy, but no foetal bones were found. In reference to this, the surgeon stated that the fa3tal bones contained more animal matter, and might have been decomposed, although he declined to swear that within the period of fourteen years, they Avould have been entirely obliterated. No hair Avas found, although sought for, and no traces of clothes of any kind could be discovered ; but there was a singular fact connected Avith the loAver jaAV, by Avhich it Avas supposed the skeleton could be identified as that of the missing Lydia Atlee. A labourer stated that a. fortnight before the woman Avas missing, he drew a double tooth from the lower jaw (the fii-st molar on the left side). When the exhumed jaAV Avas shoAvn to him, this tooth was absent, and he affirmed that that was the place Avhere he drew the tooth.


[170/1290 b21964944_0170.jp2]

lOG IDENTITY FROM THE TEETH. He tlnis appeared clearly to identify the skeleton as that of the missing woman. The evidence of other witnesses was adduced to show that on the evening of July 22, 1850, the accused and Lydia Atlee were seen to go together into an orchard at the back of the accused's house. They were overheard quarrelling, and the woman's voice was identified, muttering the words, ' I believe you mean kiUing me to night.' It appeared that the skeleton was found buried about a mile from this orchard. Dr. Markham, who also gave evidence on the case, said in reference to the pregnancy of the woman, if it was a nine months' foetus, some of ^ the foetal bones ought to have been found with the skeleton : the hair might have disappeared in thirteen years. With regard to the lower jaw, he observed that if the tooth was extracted, it could not have been taken away long before death. The cavity Avas partly filled up, which might be explained by its having been extracted without one or all of its fangs. Although the identity of the skeleton, as that of the missing woman, was thus left a little uncertain, the accused was committed for murder. In the meantime .the ground was again searched for foetal bones, and the result was that, about eighteen inches deeper in the earth, the skeleton of a full- grown man was found, foot to foot with that of the female skeleton above. That of the man was lying on its back and the bones appeared to have been much longer in the ground. On this discovery, it was suggested that the spot might have been a gipsy's burial place, in which one body Avas laid in a grave over another without the ordinary clothing. That the accused should select a spot a mile away from his dwelling for burying the body of a Avoman Avhom he Avas alleged to haA'^e murdered, and that he should then place the body at full length, over another dead body just beloAv it, was most improbable. The entire absence of the foetal bones was another fact adA'erse to the alleged identity. I am assured by an eminent dentist Avho examined the loAver jaw, that the tooth, supposed to have been draAvn a fort- night before death, is one of the most common teeth to be absent in the jaws of middle-aged persons, and further, that it might have been removed from the jaw for three months or more beforje death. There was nothing by Avhich a more recent period could be fixed, as part of the cavity had been filled up by the usual osseous structure. At the Northampton Lent assizes, 1864, the accused Avas discharged on bail. Questions of identity may turn, not only on the number and nature of the natural teeth, but also on the presence of artificial teeth, with the mechanical appliances for securing them. On the trial of Professor Webster for the murder of Dr. Parkman (p. 88), the evidence given by a dentist, Dr. Keep, established the identity of the mutilated remains of the deceased, in spite of an attempt which had been made to destroy the jaAvs by fire. This gentleman deposed that, about four years previously, he had made and fitted for Dr. Park- man sets of artificial teeth in blocks for each jaAv. He saw Dr. Parkman Avith these teeth in his head, for the last time, about a fortnight before his dis- appearance. He then put a noAV spring to the teeth. He recognized the artificial teeth, taken from a furnace, by certain peculiarities about them, and also by their fitting the original plates and moulds, Avhich he retained in his possession. The gold plates attached to them had been melted in an assay furnace, in an attempt to destroy the head of the deceased, but the greater part of this gold Avas recovered, and the artificial teeth, to Avhich the gold plates had been flistened, had acquired a pink colour from a portion of the finely divided metallic gold, shoAving that they had been submitted to a high temperature, but had not undergone fusion, although minute particles of "^old were fused into them. The left side of the lower jaAV presented a great natural irregularity. The block corresponded to this, and thus placed the identity


[171/1290 b21964944_0171.jp2]

SKELETONS. DETERMINATION OF STATURE. 107 of the jaws beyond dispute. (' Report of Trial of Prof. Webster,' Boston 1S')0, p. 50.) Bones and teeth which have been long buried, may, by percolation of water through the soil, become impregnated with oxide of iron, sulphate of lime, or the carbonates of magnesia and lime. They generally contain much lime. In some bones, disinterred near one of the plaster quan'ies of Paris, Lassaigne found, besides 66"7 of the usual mineral constituents, 2*3 per cent, of sulphate of lime, with traces of oxide of iron. Other bones, of soldiers killed in 1814, and buried near the siime spot, yielded u6'l of sub-phosphate and carbonate of lime, 0*5 of sulphate, and 8'2 per cent, of argillaceous sand. These bones had been buried for a period of thirty-three years. They con- tained 15 per cent, of animal matter and 20 of water. Those taken irom the plaster quarry, contained the same quantity of water, but only 11 per cent, of organic matter. (' Annuaire de Chimie,' 1847, p. 759). Determination of Stature.—The average stature of Englishmen is from five feet six to five feet nine inches; although about four out of one hundred are calculated to have a stature of from six feet to six feet three inches. In determining the stature from the measurement of the entire skeleton it is iisual to add fi-ora an inch to an inch and a half for the thickness of the soft parts. -When the bones are entirely disixrticidat-ed, they mvist be laid out in their natural order, and an estimate made. Medical jurists have endeavoured to determine the stature of a skeleton from the riieasureinent of one or more of the long bones—as, for example, of the femur, tibia, fibula, humerus, radius, and ulna; but the rules for this mode of calculation are unsatisfactory: and as INI. Devergie has clearly shown from the tables, they are liable to lead to an error of five inches at the least. The fact is, there does not appear to be any uniform relation between the length of these individual bones and the stature of a person. In tall persons it is observed "that" the boneS of the lower limbs are proportionably longer than those of the upper ; but we are liable to meet with all kinds of anomalies, and the best that can be said of this mode of measurement is, that it can never be proved w-rong : for in general there can be no witness to speak to the stature of the person while living, in cases in which a medical investigation of this kind is directed to be made. We advance very little to a solution of this question, even by deducing the average length of a long bone from the measurement of a large number of similar bones. The differences in the length of the bones, will be great according to whether the measurement is made from the edge of one articular surface to the other, or whether the processes are included or excluded, such as the styloid process of the ulna and the inner malleolus of the tibia. I have below drawn up the measurements of three adult male skeletons, which were taken as accurately as possible by the repeated examination of the numerous skeletons in the museum of Guy's Hospital. Nos. 1 and 2 comprise nearly the average stature of Englishmen; No. 3 represents the skeleton of a tall man. The height here is the bare measurement of the bones with the soles of the feet resting on the ground : an addition of at least an inch should be made for the soft parts. The lengths of the tibia and fibula, were taken between the articular surfaces. From end to end the fibula is a remarkably long bone. I have found it in adults to be in many cabcs as long as fiileen inches.


[172/1290 b21964944_0172.jp2]

108 STATURE INFERRED FROM THE BONES. Adult male Skeletons. No. \. Ft. In. Stature (sole on the ground) . Transverse mea- surement from extremity of middle fingers Femur Tibia between f Fibula/art. surf.\ 13| 5 6 5 61 171 161 No. 2. Ft. In. 5 9 10.L 18 UJ 14 No. 3. Ft. In. 6 0 1 m 14^ Humerus . Radius Ulna . Chivicle Hand from car- pus, joining the radius No. 1. Ft. In. . 12 9 10 5- "8 No. 2. Ft. In. 12 101 No. 3. Ft. In. 101! The subjoined table contains the measurements of two female skeletons; the one of an adult, the other of an aged woman. Female Skeletons. Stature Transverse length Femur Tibia . Fibida Humei'us These are soldier. Adult Female. Ft. In. 5 2i 6 2^ 16 12| 111 Aged Female. Ft. In. 5 5 I 16 lU 121 111 Radius Ulna . Clavicle Hand from wrist Adult Female. Ft. In. 8 9 the Aged Female. Ft. In. 7^ 4 5 the measurements of the bones of the arm of a well-formed Arm of a Soldier. Inches. 12i lOi 72 ' 8 Humerus . . . Radius Ulna Clavicle . Hand from wrist The followino; are full-length measurements of perfect but detached bones of a male skeleton used for anatomical demonstration : — Total length of arm . 29i X 2 = 59 Ckvicles 12 Sternum Stature about 6 feet. Inches. 29i Detached Bones of a male Skeleton. Inches. Inches. Femur 18 Humerus 12f Tibia loi Ulna 10^ Fibula 15 Radius 9^ In the course of these investigations an attempt was made to determine whether there was any correspondence between the transverse length of the skeleton, measured from the extreme ends of the phalanges of the middle fingers, the arms being maintained in a horizontal position. It will be seen that both in the male and female, there is a very near approximation in these measurements. We have only the bones of the arm of a male adult; we may, by doubling its length, and adding twelve inches for the two clavicles, and an inch and a half for the sternum, determine approximatively the stature. Thus, by applying this rule to the arm of the soldier, of which the measure- ments have been just given, Ave should have a stature of six feet. This method of taking a whole extremity, although only approximate, is likely to lead to less error than that of determining the stature by the measurement of a solitary bone. Below are two measurements, the one of a male skeleton between ten and eleven years of age, the other of a mature child at the end of nine montht<' utero-gestation. The dried cartilages at the ends of the long bones are not


[173/1290 b21964944_0173.jp2]

DETERMINATION OF AGE FROM STATURE. 109 included in the measurement of the latter, because they are never found in graves; we have merely the osseous portions to examine. Male Skeleton Mature Male Skeleton Tlnt.nTnll V Phi 111 nf- naturally articulated. 9 months. articulated. Ft. In. In. Ft. In. Stature , . 3 10 . . 19J Ulna ... 6J . Femur 11^ qi . 3 Clavicle . . 4 . Tibia . . 2f Hand from wrist. 5 FibiJa . H . • Arms, each Humerus Measurement across the chest Iladius 6" . . 2 Mature Child at 9 months- In. 2i ■^4 Statttre. Ft. Ft. In. 2 to 2 3 3 4 Age. At fourteen to sixteen . „ twenty to twenty-five Stature. Ft. Ft. In. 4 to 5 5 to 5 6 Beclard remarks on the stature of the body, as determined by the dimen- sions of the skeleton, that it is about five feet four inches for an adult male, and about five feet for an adult female ; but it is subject to great variation, not merely in the various races of men, but in individuals of the same nation. The.se extremes, however, are comprised within certain limits. Thus dwarfs (as adults) are rarely less than one-half of the average stature, while giants are seldom more than one-half above the average. Determination of Age from Stature.—In attempting to determine the age of a skeleton from the measurement of the bones, it must be remembered that there is a great difference in the rapidity of growth, not merely in children of tlie same sex, but in children of different sexes. Sometimes a child Avill be much under the average stature before puberty, but will rapidly grow after having passed this period: hence the subjoined table, taken from M. Sue, is scarcely available for practical purposes. We must, at any rate, allow of the possible existence of great deviations. Here is the table, somewhat modified by additional observations. Age. At one year ,, three years „ ten to twelve . The full stature, however, according to some recent observations, is rarely attained until the age of from twenty-five to twenty-seven years. This table refers to the stature of living persons; it will be somewhat less for the skeleton. M. de S. Luca has recently brought before the Academy of Sciences the results of his researches on the relative length and weight of the bones which constitute the human skeleton. (' Cosmos,' Oct. 2, 18G3, p. 386.) He has demonstrated the existence of relative proportions among parts of the body Avhich had not previously been suspected. His view is, that in the construction of animals there is among the various organs, a uniform relation of weight, ■length, and surface. The average stature of an adult man is, according to him, five feet three inches (1 metre, 60 centimetres), that of an adult Avoman one-twentieth less, i.e. within a small fi-action of five feet. The head forms one-eighth part of the total height of the body : this is divided into two equal parts immediately below the eyes, while the nostrils are midway between the eves and chin. In a vertical section of the body, the pubis is a central point between the two extremes. When the arms are raised vertically above the liead, the umbilicus or navel, which is one metre (39.37 inches) from the sole of the foot, then becomes the centre of the length. It may be further remarked that the height of a man corresponds to the distance which separates the extremities of the two hands, when the arms are extended in a horizontal line from the body (p. 108). The arm may be divided into five parts, the hand representing one part, while two others are occupied by the forearm, and the remaining two parts by the upper arm, the elbow being the boundary of


[174/1290 b21964944_0174.jp2]

DISTINCTION OF RACE. IDENTITY 110 these divisions. Whatever the length of the hand, five times that length will represent the total length of tlie arm, so that if the hand is 133 millimetres (5.22 inches) the arm will be GOG millimetres (2G.13 inches) in length. In reference to the hand, the carpal and metacarpal bones represent one half of its length. The first phalanx of the middle finger is equal to one-fourth of the hand, and the two last phalanges of this finger, taken together, are exactly equal to the length of the first phalanx. Tlie last phalanx is itself naturally divided by the nail into two equal parts. The sole of the foot is a third longer than tke palm of the hand, but the back of the foot or instep is of the same length. The observations made on the Aveight of the bones showed : 1, tliat the bones of the right side of the body were heavier than those of the left. 2. The weight of the bones above the navel is equal to the Aveight of those which are below that point. 3. The weight of the bones of the hand is equal to the fifth part of the weight of the bones of the arm. There is the same relation here as in length. 4. The total Aveight of the hand may be divided into five equal parts, one represented by the carpal, two by the metacarpal bones, and two by the bones of the fingers. The first phalanx is equal to two-thirds of the .weight of the entire finger, the other third being represented by the two remaining phalanges. 5. The bones of the hand are equal to half the weight of the bones of the foot. G. In the foot there are similar relations. The weight of the tarsal is double that of the metatarsal bones, and the weight of the toes is divided into three parts, tAvo for the first phalanges and one for the tAvo small phalanges. Difference of Race.—There are certain differences in the skeleton, according to whether it belongs to an individual of the Caucasian, Mongolian, or Negro variety of mankind. The differences chiefly relate to the proportion Avhich the skull bears to the face, and the relative lengths of the upper and lower extremities. In the Caucasian the skull is rounded, the forehead raised, and the facial portion small in proportion to it. In the Mongolian, the upper and loAver extremities are small, the cranium more of a square form, the forehead inclined, and the face large and flattened; the malar bones being especially prominent. In the Negro the proportions of the skeleton are smaller in the lumbar and pelvic regions; the upper extremities are long in proportion to the body, and the foreami and leg are large in proportion to the arm and thigh; the hands are small, the feet wide and flat, and the ossa calcis projecting much backAvards. The skull is narrow and elongated, the forehead small and compressed, the malar bones and jaAvs proiecting, and the teeth placed obliquely, so as to form a considerable angle at their point of union. The most mai-ked characteristics exist in the configuration of the skull; but the skull of Ho Loo (a Chinese), in the Guy's Museum, scarcely possesses the characters assigned to the Mongolian; it closely resembles the skull of the Caucasian. That of the Negro may be more clearly identified. The skull of the Hindoo is a mixture of the Negro and Caucasian. It Avould be difficult if not impossible, to pronounce an opinion of the race to which the skeleton belonged, from a feAV detached bones or parts of bones. Identity from Fractures.—With regard to other circumstances connected Avith the skeleton, it will be proper to observe whether the bones belonn- to the same or different individuals, to the right or the left side of the body • and these questions may be determined in many cases by the mere inspection of fragments. The existence or non-existence of fractures, and the progress which may have been made towards ossific union, may also become an important subject of inqiiiry. In general the past existence of a fracture 'is easily determined in an exhumed bone, by the appearance of a knot'or ridge, or in some cases a thick deposit of bone Avhere union has taken place badly. In a fractured bone Avhich has united in a curved form, it Avill be


[175/1290 b21964944_0175.jp2]

Ill FROM FRACTURED BONES. observed, on making a section, tliat the shell is considerably thicker on that side which has had to bear the greatest weight or pressure. All these facts, trivial as they may appear, may in reality be material in a case of disputed identity; and unless carefully observed at the time, valuable evidence may be lost. An English gentleman residing in India was charged with the murder of a native, Meer Khan. The evidence against the prisoner was of a two-fold character : 1, that which preceded death, and 2, that which followed it. With regard to the first, it will be only necessary to refer to it briefly. There was great discrepancy in the statements of the witnesses, as to the manner in which the deceased was alleged to have been destroyed. It was shown that the deceased had received a beating at the hands of the accused, but it was not proved that the man had died in consequence of the beating. There was no effusion of blood ; there were no marks of violence of any kind upon the body before or after death, unless, indeed, we except a burning of the skin of the legs, which was alleged to have been produced by burnt paper or straw, but the evidence respecting this was anything but coherent and conclusive. Be that as it may, however, there was no evidence to prove that the alleged burning was the cause of the man's death. Two of the men (natives) who said they can-ied the dead body to be buried at midnight, testified to the presence of marks of burning, biit contradicted each other respecting the appearance of the legs; one swearing that they were covered with plaster, the other that the w^ounds and burns were not covered. The latter witness prevaricated, and, when asked how he knew that the legs were burnt, replied that he judged so from their being white. The testimony respecting the degree and effects of the violence applied to the deceased during life being, then, so inconclusive, it was left to the jury to decide whether a quantity of human bones produced were those of the deceased, as it was alleged by the witnesses for the prosecution, or whether they belonged to the skeleton of some other person. According to the depositions, they were found in the following manner. Three months after the burial, one of the witnes.ses who had assisted in burying the deceased, after some search, discovered, as he supposed, the grave, on the verge of the bank of the river Damoodah. The body, it seems, had been buried pretty deeply in the sand, above the common water-mark, at the distance of sixty or eighty yards fi-om the bed of the river, at a place which the waters had never reached, or could reach only on extraordinary occasions. The bones were uncovered, but not removed, until five days afterwards. It does not seem to have been clearly made out Avhether other bodies were ever interred in that spot or not, nor was the grave properly identified as that of the d(>ceased. The bones were subsequently examined by Mr. Cheek, a medical oflicer attached to the station of Bancoorah. He stated in his evidence that twelve of the vertebra}, six of the ribs, and the sacrum, were wanting; that the whole of the bones found were clean and dry, and fi-ee from periosteum, ligaments, and cartilage; that one rib was broken, and apparently had an osseous callus (new bone) formed upon and around the fractured ends. The wit- ness gave it as his opinion that the fracture must have occurred at least seven or eight days before death ; he had never heard of an instance of exhumed bones being deprived of soft parts and ligaments by natural decomposition in three months. He should not expect the cartilages and ligaments to be separated from the bones within a year of the interment; he considered it, therefore, extremely improbable that these were the bones of the deceased, or of any person who had died Avithin three months from the time of examination. From this evidence, as the reporter of the case remarks, several considera- tions suggest themselves; as, for example, the identity of all the bones as


[176/1290 b21964944_0176.jp2]

IDENTITY FROM DISEASE OR DEFORMITY. 112 those of one individual, the age of the person, the nature of the bony excre- scence or calhis iuund on the broken rih, the time necessary for the formation of new bone in order to settle the period at which the fracture took place, the time required for the total spontaneous destruction of the muscles, tendons, ligaments, and viscera; also the time required for the spontaneous separation of the sacrum from the other bones in a man of the age of fifty or sixty. Many of these points, important as they were, were altogether passed over. The witness gave it as his opinion, that they were the bones of a male subject; but of this, he said, he could not be quite certain as the sacrum was wanting. No opinion was asked or given as to the supposed age of the person to whom the bones belonged. Only one bone was produced in Court, viz., the broken rib, with the deposit of callus (new bone) at its extremity. From the state of this callus there could be no doubt, supposing the bone to have belonged to the deceased, that the fracture must have been produced about eight or ten days before death; therefore at some time previous to the violence employed by the prisoner. The non-identity of the bones as those of the deceased, seems, however, to have been clearly established by the condition in Avhich they were discovered. Even in a tropical climate the period that must elapse before the total destruction of the soft parts of the body in a grave, so that nothing but the bare bones shall remain, must be considerably greater than three months. In one instance, in which a body Avas exhumed four months after death, the soft parts were still present. Another curious feature in the evidence was the separation of the sacrum from the bones of the pelvis. The junction of these bones by ligaments and tibro-cartilage is perhaps one of the strongest in the body. In the skeletons of the young these bones are rather difficult of separation; but in tlie old, in whom anchylosis in genei'al takes place to a greater or less extent, the difficulty of separating them becomes incomparably greater. It may readily be conceived, then, that the entire separation of this bone by decomjDosition, would require, even in a hot climate, an extremely long period in a body interred in the ground—probably fi-om three to ten years. Now, when Ave consider that the deceased had not been buried above three months, it is clear, both from the entire destruction of the soft parts, and the separation of the sacrum, that the bones discovered on the bank of the river, could not have belonged to the deceased, but must haA'-e been part of the skeleton of a person Avhose body had been buried in the spot many years before. There Avas, therefore, a complete failure of identity, and the accused Avas discharged. Identity from Disease or Deformity.—Questions of identity in relation to skeletons may be in some cases solved by reference to certain special characters of the bones. They may have about them indications of disease; as rickets, softening of the bones, or syphilis. There may be, again, some personal peculiarities, such as the presence of supernumerary fingers or toes, Avhich, if observed, may tend to throAv some light upon the case. A curious instance of this kind is mentioned by Orfila. In the year 1823, a soldier, of the name of Bonino, who had been residing in a small villao-e in the neighbourhood of Montpellier, suddenly disappeared. It Avas some time afterAvards reported, that he had been murdered by a girl Avith whom he had cohabited, and by a man of the name of Dimont, Avho was known to have been for some time her associate. It Avas only in the year 1826, after the lapse of more than tAvo years, that the magistrates Avere first induced to direct an investigation of the case. A strict search Avas ordered, and the remains of the body, chiefiy the bones, were found buried in the garden of Dimont, who liad married the girl nine months after the disappearance of Bonino. It Avas of course essential to identify this skeleton as that of the deceased.' It Avas


[177/1290 b21964944_0177.jp2]

EVIDEiVCE FKOM DEFORMITIES. 113 Avell known that he had laboured under a singular personal deformity in having a sixth finger on the right hand, and a sixth toe on the left foot. The bones, which were nearly all perfect, were carefully removed and put together, when it was found that those belonging to the two smaller toes ai' the left foot were wanting; but the metatarsal bone of the fifth toe had a process on the outer side, with a small articulating surface, which might have formed a supernumerary joint. Still, however, this Avas considered insufficient to establish the point, and the attention of the examiners was then directed to the right hand. The fifth bone of the metacarpus was shorter and broader than the one belonging to the opposite hand, while its digital extremity was divided into two parts, of which one formed a smooth, rounded, articulating surface in the axis of the bone; while the other, which presented a more flattened articular surface, formed with it an angle of about 8°. On attem^iting to articulate the first phalanx of the little finger, it fitted exactly the first articular surface, and presented on the outer side a distinct groove, the oblique direction of which coincided with the direction of this second surface. This lefl; no doubt of the nature of the peciiliarity of structure ; although the phalanges of the sixth finger could not be discovered. The left hand and the right foot were complete in all their parts. Other corroborating circumstances transpired with respect to the marks of violence on the body, and the two prisoners were tried, condemned, and executed. (For other cases see 'Ann. d'Hyg.' 1863. 2. p. 114.) Deformities of the spine or limbs are easily observed, and form well-marked points of identity. Briand mentions the following case. In 1825 the brother of a man named Michel Guerin suddenly disappeared. A year afterwards an excavation wrs made in the cellar of the house where the two brothers had resided, and some human bones were discovered. Among other circum- stances, the medical men to whom the examination of these bones was re- ferred, remarked that the body of the fifth lumbar vertebra was depressed and thin as it is met with in rachitic individuals, that the pelvis was more con- tracted on the left than on the right side, that the tibia and fibula of each leg presented a remarkable curvature, greater, however, on the left than on the right side, so that the left leg was half an inch shorter than the right. There were certain peculiarities about the teeth of the lower jaw, the cuspi- dati forming a considerable projection in front of the incisors. These facts, together with other circumstances, established the identity of the bones, as being those of the individual who had been missing for a year. The bones of the skull in children may occasionally present appearances arising from natural causes, but which may simulate the effects of violence applied to the head. The following case of suspected child-murder was examined by Mr. Lord and myself in 1847. The dead body of a new-born child, wrapped in brown paper and a towel, was found in a pond. Mr. Lord examined it for tlie coroner's inquest. The head was much decomposed, and the scalp was ex- tensively lacerated and destroyed over the parietal bones, Avhieh readily separated. The brain was reduced to a bloody pulp. The umbilical cord, which had not been tied, was cut obliquely at alx)ut six inches from the navel. The lungs, which were very crepitant, readily floated on water, and bore up the heart. The body was generally bloodless. The point of difliculty which the case presented, consisted in the presence of two apertures on one parietal bone. These apertures were small and rounded, and it was at first doubtful whether they had not been wilfully produced by some perforating instrument applied to the head. It was remarked that one aperture was situated near the temporal ridge, and in this situation the scalp was entire and uninjured. The other was situated in that part of the bone which corre- sponded to the lacerated portion of the scalp. It was ascertained that no violence had been used in the removal of the body fi-om the Avater. The I


[178/1290 b21964944_0178.jp2]

114 EXAMINATION OF CALCINED BONES. bone was macerated, and carefully examined by the aid of a lens. It was then perceived that the apertures were quite regular at the edges, which Avere remarkably thin, evidently passing into a membranous condition. The in- ternal table was also deficient, so that, from the interior, tlie bone was bevelled off gradually from each aperture. This examination left no doubt that the holes in the bone were not due to any mechanical violence applied during life, but to deficient ossification. These spaces had been membranous, and the membrane destroyed by decomposition. The putrefaction of the scalp, and its separation, might have been accelerated by a bruised condition of these parts during a difficult labour. It has already been stated that the bones which we are required to examine, may have undergone calcination. In several cases of murder Avhich have occurred, an attempt has been made to dispose of the body by burning it. This method of disposing of a dead body is by no means unusual in cases of alleged child-murder and concealment of l)irth. There will be no great difl^iculty in giving an opinion whether a bone has or not undergone calcina- tion. Its character is entirely altered. Its shape may be preserved, but if burnt in the open air, it will be white; if in a close fire, it will be black or ash-grey. The bone is brittle, easily pulverisable, and dissolves entirely in hydrochloric acid, leaving, if perfectly calcined, only some charcoal, but no animal matter. In the case of the Queen v. Varney (Oxford Lent Assizes, 1837), it was proved that the woman had been pregnant, and subsequently delivered of a child. Its body had been burnt, and only a few remains of the bones of a human fojtus were found in the ashes of a grate. The prisoner Avas convicted of concealment of birth. In a case like this, in which an attempt had been made to destroy the body of a child by burning, it will, of course, be necessary to have good evidence that the bones are those of a human fxtus or child. A small fi-agment only of either end of any well-marked bone will suffice for identification. If the jaws be forthcoming, the alveolar cavities should be sought for, and the number and condition of the teeth noticed. The period of uterine life which the child had attained, may be thus in some instances determined. For two cases in Avliich age and identity Avere thus determined, see ' Gazette des Hopitaux,' April 2G, 1850. If the body has been burned to a complete ash or powder, it will then be difiicult to identify the bones. Orfila was consulted in a case of this kind, where a woman had burnt a child in an oven, and its ashes had become mixed with those of wood. He suggested that on calcining the residue Avith potash, the ashes of a human fa3tua might be knoAvn by their yielding cyanide of potassium, owing to the nitrogen Avhich Avould remain in and iibout them. The ashes of Avood do not yield the cyanide under similar circumstances. ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1845, vol. 2. p. 129.) The conclusions draAvn under such circumstances might, it appears to me, lead to a serious error :—the presence of a flannel dress, of an old hat, shoe, or any nitrogenous substance, would, on incineration, give rise to precisely similar results. When the/or?tt of a bone cannot be recognized, all that medical evidence can accomplish may be thus stated :—The detection of a large quantity of phos- phate of lime in the ash Avoidd indicate that bones were present, and thus distinguish the ash of bone from the ashes of other substances. Still the bones might have belonged to an animal, and not to a human foetus. There are no means of distinguishing the ash of human, from that of animal bone, or the ash of foetal, from the ash of adult bones. In the case of the Leinoines, mother and daughter, tried before the French Courts in December 1859, the evidence went to shoAv that the elder prisoner (the mother) burnt tlie body of a child of which her daughter had been secretly delivered.


[179/1290 b21964944_0179.jp2]

115 CAUSES OF DEATH. SUDDEN DEATH. Some bones of a child were recovered, and among others the frontal bone. The medical evidence was to the effect, that the bones were those of a child which had reached about the seventh or eighth month. Upon this corrobora- tion, the jury convicted the elder prisoner, and the Court sentenced her to twenty years' imprisonment. In a case of concealment of birth tried at the Guildford Summer Assizes, 1854 {Reg. v. Berryman), it was proved by medical evidence, that the prisoner had been recently delivered of a child, not less than seven months of uterine age. She said that she had burnt the body to conceal her shame, and had buried the remains in a garden. Some bones which had been calcined were there found biiried in ashes; and after an examination of them, a medical man stated that they were the bones of a child nine months of age ; but in comparing them with the skulls of nine months' children in IMuseum collections, it was admitted that the skull, of which the parts had been found and restored, was larger. This admission threw some doTibt on the identity of the bones, and the prisoner was discharged. In January 18G3, a man named Barton, a fireman employed at a coal pit near Wigan, was missing. From the appearance of blood about the mouth of the steam furnace, and the discovery of a burned portion of the dress worn by the deceased, thei'e was reason to believe that the man had been murdered and his body thrust into the furnace. Dr. Edwards, of Liverpool, examined the ashes of the furnace and found :—1. Portions of the occipital bone of the human skull; 2. Base of the skull and two fangs of teeth, a fang of incisor and a fang of molar; 3. Portions of the arches of the dorsal vertebras ; 4. A ]iortion of the lumbar vertebrae ; 5. A portion of the head, body, and joint of the humerus ; and G. A portion of the head and joint of the femur or thigh-bone. I'liese bones had been heated to a high temperature, which had destroyed their internal structure, but the external form was well preserved. They Avere human bones. A chemical and microscopical examination of some of the clinkers showed that there was blood tipon them, having the character of human blood. There was no doubt that these were the remains of the missing man. Pie was last seen alive at eight in the evening, and at four tlie following morning, nothing remained of him but the few bones above mentioned. In the exhumation of remains, portions of hair may be found on or about the skull, or in the earth surrounding it. The hair should be separated by washing it first in water, and afterwards in a mixture of distilled water and diluted acetic acid. When dried on paper the colour will be observed, and this may be of some value in determining a question of identity. French medical jurists lay great stress upon the necessity for determining whether the hair has been artificially dyed or not. The common hair-dyes are compounds of lead, silver, or bismuth ; and these metals, when the necessity arises, may be sought for and easily found by processes similar to those recjuired for their detection as poisons when absorbed into the tissues. This will be a matter for future consideration. CHAPTER 7. CAUSES OF DEATH—SUDDEN DEATH SYNCOPE, ASPHYXIA, COlfA—PRESUMPTION OF DEATH—MEDICAL EVIDENCE OF PRIORITY OF DEATH IN CASES OF SEVERAL PERSONS PERISHING FROM A COMMON CAUSE—PRESUMPTION OF SURVIVORSHIP. ]\Iedical jurisprudence takes cognizance of all violent causes of death, and is only indirectly involved in those cases of natural death which simulate the I 2


[180/1290 b21964944_0180.jp2]

IIG DEATH BY SYiXCOPE. APNfflA, OR ASPHYXIA. effects of violence. Thus all causes which operate to produce death suddenly, as by syncope, asphyxia, or cojna, especially demand the attention of a medical jiu'ist. These may be either natural or violent; and the distinction between them is of importance, since the guilt or innocence of a person charged with crime may depend on a coiTCct determination of the cause. The continuance of life depends upon the proper and regulated action of the heart, the limgs, and the brain; and the interdependence of these organs is such that the arrest of the functions of one of them, is speedily followed by the arrest of the others. Hence they have been called the tripod of life. When the suspension of the motions of the heart is the primary cause of death, the person is said to die by syncoiae. The term asphyxia is applied to death which begins by the lungs; and coma to that which arises from a primary dis- turbance of the functions of the brain. Syncope ((TuyKOTrrw).—In order that the action of the heart should be maintained, it is necessary, first, that the blood supplied to it should be in sufficient quantity, and secondly that this blood should be of proper quality. In death from haemorrhage we have an instance of deficiency, and in death from certain ^^oisons, as Avell as diseases, an illustration of defect of blood. In ordinary syncope (fainting or swooning) there is simply a deficiency in the (luantity of blood which passes through the heart, although there is no actual loss of this fluid from the circulation. Certain diseases which affect the muscular structure of the heart, as well as its meuabranous valves and blood- vessels, may also lead to a sudden arrest of its functions. These morbid con- ditions produce a mechanical impediment to the motions of the organ by which the blood is propelled, and death by syncope is the necessary result. When death takes place by the heart, the right and left cavities of this organ are found to contain blood in the normd proportion in which that fluid is ordinarily circulated. This retention of blood in these cavities, arises from the sudden stoppage of the heart's contractions. Blood is found in the laro-e veins (venai cavaj), as well as in the arterial trunks. There is no congestion or accumxilation of blood in the lungs or the brain. Asphyxia (a priv. and or^u^tc pulse, signifying pulselessness).—This state is induced by any cause which arrests the function of respiration. The term apnoja (from d priv. and nvito I respire) is more appropriate; for the state of syncope might equally be called asphyxia. The various forms of death by suffocation, as in the obstruction of the air-passages from mechanical causes in drowning, hanging, and strangulation, furnish illustrations of death commencing hy the lungs, or asphyxia. The effect of cutting off air from the lun^rs is that the blood is not aerated, and it is therefore circulated in a state unfitted to support the nutrition of the heart and brain. It is necessarily distributed with the impurities derived from the waste of tissue, and thus acts as a poison to all the organs. It is incapable of sustaining nerve-force or muscular irritability. It stagnates in the capillary vessels of the lungs, produces a languid action of the heart by its circulation through the muscular structure of this organ, and it produces insensibility by its distribution throu^rh the blood-vessels of the bram. The lungs are essential to the circulatfon bv punfymg the blood. Death from asphyxia may be therefore regarded simply as death from ihfect of blood. The observations of the late «ir B Brodie ('Lectures on Pathology,' 6G) and others have clearly proved that in spite of the impurity of the blood, the heart will continue to act and the circulation to be maintained for two or three minutes or longer after respiration has entirely ceased. Phis may be proved by hanging or strangling an animal, and observino- the condition of the heart. As the action of this organ cmitiiuies afler l e


[181/1290 b21964944_0181.jp2]

ASPHYXIA. DEATH BY COMA. IIT animal has ceased to breathe, life is not actually extinct; and under favourable circumstances, it may be restored, so long as this action continues. Supposing that the suspension of respiration is complete, the action of the heart gradually slackens and finally stops. It is at this period of tlie complete arrest of the motions of the heart that asphyxia passes into death. AjDncea is determined by the time at which respiration is completely arrested. The circulation of the unaerated blood through the brain, appears to annihilate sensibility, so that no consciousness or feeling exists: the person is, to all appearance, dead. There are many diseases which operate fatally by arresting the functions of the lungs, and these may be regarded as furnishing the natural causes of asphyxia. The violent causes, including not only the ordinary modes of suffocation, but the effects of certain poisons, are not difficult to appreciate, provided a true history of the case can be obtained. In death by the lungs, as the circulation of the blood is primarily arrested in these organs, the pulmonary artery, the right cavities of the heart, and the vena; cava? are found gorged with blood. The pulmonary veins, the left cavities of the heart, and the aorta, are either empty or contain but little blood. In certain cases of asphyxia, the right cavities of the heart, as well as the left, have been found empty. "When the access of air to the lungs is suddenly and completely cut off, the circulation of the blood is very speedily arrested; but supposing the occlusion of the air-passages to be partial or gradual, the circulation of the blood may continue for a time, and thus cause congestion of certain organs. Hence the appearances in asphyxia differ greatly. A mixed condition under the name of syncopal asphyxia has been described by some pathologists. In this, the cavities of the heart are found empty. Coma.—Besides a due supply of aerated blood, the brain requires for the exercise of its functions a proper quantity of blood, so that either by the sudden withdrawal of this fluid, or by a distribution of impure blood, these are arrested. A person thus affected falls into a state of complete insensi- bilitv (coma), so that it is impossible to rouse him. The functions of the heart and lungs are not suddenly arrested under these circumstances. They appear to be less dependent on the brain than the brain is upon them; but this is rather a question of degree. A due supply of nervous force is re- quired for the action of the muscles, whether of the heart or of the chest; and when this is withdrawn, the heart ceases to pulsate, and the respiratory muscles cease to act: circulation and respiration are thvis arrested by the absence of innervation. This is sometimes described as death by paralysis of the heart and lungs. The blood is neither aerated nor circulated. Sudden death from apoplexy is an illustration of death by the brain. Coma may also be a result of the introduction of certain poisons into the blood, and of fractures of the skull leading to compression of the brain or destruc- tion of its substance. . In death by the brain, the appearances observed consist chiefly in a con- gested state of the cerebral membranes and substance of the brain. As, before death, respiration is affected, the lungs are congested and blood accumulates in the cavities of the heart, more on the right than on the left side. The appearances described as characteristic of the different modes of death by the heart, lungs, and brain, are liable to variation by reason of the intimate relation of the organs. Thus, there may be a mixed condition of syncope and asphyxia, or of asphyxia with cerebral congestion. With regard to the interruption of the functions of the brain as a result of pressure by the effusion of blood or serum, it is to be observed that a very small quantity effused at the base or in the substance of the medulla oblon- gata, is sufficient to cause death ; while generally speaking a larger quantity


[182/1290 b21964944_0182.jp2]

PRESUMPTION OP DEATH. 118 is required to be efFused in the membranes, ventricles, or substance of the brain, in order to produce a fatal result. In cases of chronic hydrocephalus, in which the brain has resisted the pressure of a large accumulation of serum tor many years, a slight and sudden increase in the quantity at any period of life may lead to coma and death by apoplexy. This condition may be mis- taken for narcotic poisoning. All causes of death, whether from disease or violence, are referable to an effect produced primarily on the heart, the lungs, or the brain; but, as it has been elsewhere stated, death does not take place until the action of the heart has entirely ceased. The arrest of the circulation produces an immediate impression upon the functions of the brain and lungs; while the lungs and brain are affected and can only affect each other indirectly through the medium of the circulation : hence, systemic death, or the death of the body, is resolvable into death by syncope or a tailure of the action of the heart, and this depends in all cases either upon defect or deficiency of blood. The natural causes of sudden death may be generally traced to some injury or impediment to the action of the heart, lungs, or brain. It Avould be foreign to the objects of this work to give a description of them. The violent causes are those which demand the especial attention of a medical jurist; they will be considered hereafter. In its relations to medicine and medical jurispru- dence the subject of sudden death has been most fully treated by Ilerrich and Kopp ('Der plotzliche Tod aus inneren Ursachen,' Regensburg, 1848) ; as well as by M. Devergie ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1838, 2, 145). To these works I must refer the reader for further information on the causes, as well as on the appearances met with in the bodies of persons dying suddenly from natural causes. The violent causes of death, whether svidden or protracted, which chiefly require the skill of a medical jurist for their elucidation, are poisoning, wounds, and personal injui-ies, such as burns and scalds, as Avell as those forms of death which commence by the lungs, including drowning, hanging, strangulation, and suffocation. In nearly all cases, the body of the deceased is produced, and a medical opinion can be based upon a careful examina- tion. Presumption of Death.—Before proceeding to describe these violent causes of death in their order, it may be well in closing this part of our subject to state that the fact of death may be proved by presumptive, as well as by direct evidence. The death of any person once shown to have been alive, is a matter of fact to be determined by a jury; and when the body is not forthcoming, as the legal presumption is in favour of the continuance of life, the onus of proving the death, lies on the party who asserts it. (Best on ' Presumptions of Law and Fact.') When a person goes abroad and has not been heard of for a long time, the presumption of the continuance of life ceases at the expiration of seven years from the period at which he was last heard of. The same rule holds generally with respect to a person who has gone away from his usual place of resort, and of whom no account can be given, but the presumption does not extend to the tivie of his death, i. e. whether he died at the beginning or at the end of any particular period of the seven years. In the case of Watson v. England, which came before the Court of Chancery some years since, it was attempted to enforce as a presumption, that a female who had lefl her father's house in 1810, and had not been heard of for thirty- four years, was dead. No decision was come to, the Vice-Chancellor observing, from the great iincertainty of the evidence, that if he presumed her death, the woman might walk into Court and disprove all In one case, according to Best, the Court of Queen's Bench said, (hat tlicy couM


[183/1290 b21964944_0183.jp2]

PKESUMPTION OP DEATH. 119 not assume judicially that a person alive in the year 1034 was not alive in 1827 ! (Op. cit. p. 190.) Without adopting this extrenae legal view of possible longevity, it is obvious that Courts of law may be easily deceived if such presumptions are admitted too readily. In Church v. Smith (Ex- chequer, Dec. 1853), the question was whether plaintiff was then a married Avoman, or whether by reason of the long absence of her husband, his death might not be legally presumed, and that she was, therefore, a widow, and could sue in her own right. According to the statement of her counsel, she Avas married to a man Avho had deserted her fourteen years ago, and she had heard nothing of him during the last twelve years. An end was put to the case by the appearance, in the witness-box, of an aged man who turned out to be the missing husband. The plaintiff, therefore, not having the power to sue in her own right as a widow, was non-suited, the Chief Baron observing to the jury, that he should have directed them to presume that the husband Avas dead, if, as the counsel stated, it had been proved that he had not been heard of for twelve years; but afler his appearance in Court, he could not ask them to presume a man to be dead Avho Avas actually living before their eyes. In Reg. v. Briggs (Nov. 185G), a Avoman Avas deserted by her husband four months after marriage, and he had been absent from her seven years. The woman married again in her maiden name; and on an indictment for bigamy, it Avas contended in her faA-our that the husband had been absent for the period above mentioned, and the prisoner had no knoAvledge of his existence. She was convicted, but the conviction was quashed on appeal. Great injustice Avould be done unless some rule were adopted regarding the disposition of the property of those who have been long absent, and not heard of for many yeai's. In the case of Z)ay^ (Probate Court, 1858), it Avas proved that the testator Avas a master-mariner. He made his Avill on December 2, 1850, and sailed for Melbourne from Southampton in December of that year. He then made a voyage to Calcutta, Avhere he arrived in October 1857, and in the following December, cleared from Calcutta for Port Louis in the IMauritius. His vessel never arrived at her destination, and nothing had been heard of her since that date. The correspondent of the OAvners of the vessel at the Mauritius, had from time to time reported her non-arrival. This was considered sufficient to establish a presumption of his death, although not more than tAvo years had elapsed since his departure froni England ; and probate of the will Avas granted. In Green v. Green (Vice-Chancellor's Court, July 1861), a question was raised Avhether a person Avho had not been heard of for upwards of eighteen years must be presumed to have died. The testator in the cause, Avho died in August 1838, by his Avill, dated in April 1838, gave an annuity of 30/. to his son, James Green, and upon the death of such son, the testator gave 750/. to the children of James Green, and if he should die Avithout leaving children, then the testator gave such sum of 750/. to the brothers and sisters of James Green Avho should be living at his (James Green's) death. In September 1840, James Green lefl this country for Ncav South Wales, and he had not been heard of since February 1, 1843, when he Avrote a letter acknoAvledging the receipt of the last payment of the annuity of 30/. Edward Green, one of the brothers of James Green, died on January 25, 1846, and the question Avas, Avhether the absent James Green must be presumed to have died before or after his brother Edward Green. On the former pre- sumption Edward Green's representatives Avould be entitled to a share of the 750/.; and on the latter presumption, they Avould not be so entitled. The bill was filed by one of the children of the testator, Avho Avas interested in the pi-esumption that James Green had died after his brother Edward, and


[184/1290 b21964944_0184.jp2]

PRESUMPTION OF DEATH. ]20 in that state of circumstances, the Vice-Chancellor ruled that the burden lay on the plaintiff to show that James Avas alive at the death of his brother Edward. As above stated, there was nothing to show that James Green had been heard of since February 1,1843. A decree was made to the effect that James Green must be presumed to have died before Edward Green, and that the fund should be distributed upon tliat presumption. A remarkable case was tried in the Court of Exchequer, Guildhall, in February 1802 {Hiorns and Drew v. The Ilailway Passengers' Insurance Company) which involved a question of the presumption of death from circumstantial evidence; but in which it was suggested that a grave fi-aud had been perpetrated by the parties concerned. The action was to recover fi-om defendants, the sum of 250/., on a policy of insurance on the life of one F. D. Hiorns. The alleged deceased, Hiorns, was a single man, stt. 26. He insured his life against accident, for the above-mentioned sum, on the Gth September, 1856; and on Saturday the 13th September, he went to Brighton by an evening train, taking a return ticket. He spent Sunday and Monday with his fi-iends, and on the morning of the latter day (the 15th) he had a bath in the sea ; in the evening he parted from his friends, at about seven o'clock, to go to his lodgings before returning to London, expressing his intention of taking a. second bath before doing so. He was seen to go towards the sea, and from that time up to the date of the action he had not been seen alive. On the day that he was missing, a person discovered a suit of clothes lying on the top of the steps of a bathing machine, but no trace of the owner of them, could be discovered. The police took possession of the clothes, and upon searching the pockets a purse, containing a return-ticket, was found, and they were identified as belonging to Hiorns. Advertisements were issued, and every inquiry made to discover the missing man, but without avail. On the 30th of October, forty-five days after the disappearance of Hiorns from Brighton, the naked body of a man was washed up at Walton-on-the-Naze, on the Essex coast, about 150 or 160 miles from Brighton. The body, according to the opinion of some medical men, had been in the water some .six or seven weeks, and it was, of course, very much decomposed, all traces of the features being destroyed. An inquest was held, at which the plaintiff, G. B. Hiorns, attended, giving evidence that the remains were, to the best of his belief, those of his brother. In consequence of the complete destruction of the features, according to the medical evidence, there was nothing whatever on which to base a proof of identity, and the jury foimd that it was the body of a person unknown. The defence to the action was : that the assured was still living and within reach of his friends, awaiting the receipt of the money from the Office. It seems that the alleged deceased had been a bankrupt in 1855; and in September 1856, he effected several policies of insurance in different Offices, and made his will, directing that the policies after his death .should be realized and the money appropriated to the payment of his debts. The jury could not agree and were discharged without a verdict. As in this case the body of Hiorns was not found, there was no proof of death. The discovery of the clothes was only a circumstance from which a presumption might be raised either way. Considering that the man's life had been insured in this and other Offices for only one Aveek, at the time of this mysterious disappearance, there was strong reason for suspicion. It is obvious that such cases can be elucidated by medical evidence only when it is proved that the missing party Avas labouring under some serious disease, likely to prove fatal, for Avhich he may have received medical advice • an opinion might then be required as to the degree to Avhich the disease had advanced, and the probability of its causing death Avithin a certain period.


[185/1290 b21964944_0185.jp2]

121 PRESUMPTION OF SURVIVORSHIP. No general rules can here be laid down; every case must rest upon the circumstances which accompany it. A jDresumption of death may aiise in a question of life-assurance, as when, for instance, the amount of a policy is made payable on the death of a person. He may have sailed in a ship which has not been heard of for many years ; and from circumstances it may appear to have been overtaken by a storm in which other ships were lost. In such cases, payment is commonly made under a deed of indemnity. If the case be disputed, the presumption of death is left as a question for the jury. A verdict Avas returned for the plaintiffs in an action to recover a sum insured on the life of a Mr. Macleane, the evidence being that about November 28th, 1777, the insured sailed from the Cape in a small sloop, and was never heard of afterwards. Several vessels of stronger build sailed at the same time, and they encountered a violent storm in January 1778, in which it was supposed the sloop was lost. It is clear that unless a presumption of death were allowed in such cases, great injustice would be done to the representatives of persons who had insured their lives. Priority of Death ; Presumption of Survivorship.—Let us now take the case that several persons have perished together from some common cause; it may be material to determine Avhich probably survived the other, since property may be claimed by different heirs through the several deceased persons. According to the civil law, when the parties who perished together were parent and child, the latter, if under the age of puberty, was presumed to liave died first, but if above this age, the rule was reversed. In the case of husband and wife, the presumption was in favour of the survivorship of the husband. These presumptions were based on the assumption, that the party deemed to have survived, Avas, by his superior strength and vigour, likely to have struggled longest against the common death. The laAV of France is in some measure based upon these provisions ; but in England there is no decided rule on the subject. The question of which of two parties survived the longest, is left to be determined by a jury or judge, according to the facts proved; such as the comparative age, strength, and danger to which they were respectively exposed, and any other circumstance capable of proof Avhich is calculated to throw light upon the case. It has, however, happened on several occasions, that there have been no such indicia, and the case has then generally terminated by a compromise of the suit. There is a well-knoAvn instance which is referred to by most medico-legal writers, that of General Stanwix, in which the General, with his second wife and a daughter by a former marriage, sailed in a vessel from Dublin to England. The ship with all on board was lost at sea, and no account of the manner of her perishing, was ever received. Several suits arose oi;t of this accident. The maternal uncle of the daughter claimed the effects of the General, under the principles of the civil law. This case was not decided : the suit was compromised on the recommendation of Lord Mansfield, who said he knew of no legal principle on which he could decide it. In another case, Sir W. Wynne said, that in his judgment, the most rational presumption was that all died together; and that, therefore, none could transmit rights to another. In a third, where husband and wife were drowned, and a claim was made by the wife's rela- tions. Sir J. NichoU said he assumed that they both perished at the same moment; and he therefore granted administration to the representative of the husband, as the person in whom the property really vested at the time of the decease of both. He, however, expressly obsei-ved that in giving this judg- ment, he was not deciding that the husband actually survived the wife. In a more recent case, the property was vested in a wife, and she and her husband were drowned together without any of the circumstances being


[186/1290 b21964944_0186.jp2]

PRIORITY OF DEATH. SURVIVORSIIir. 122 known. A claim was made by the husband's heirs, on the presumption that he was the survivor. Sir Herbert Jenner decided according to the principle that where a party dies possessed of property, the right to that property passes to his next of kin, unless it be shown to have passed to another by survivor- ship. Here the next of kin of the husband claimed the property which was vested in the wife, that claim must therefore be made out: it must be shown by him that the husband survived. In the absence of evidence, the parties must be presumed to have died at the same time, and the property therefore would remain where it was vested, unless there was evidence to show that it had been devested by survivorship. Some years ago the following case was referred to me for a medical opinion: —whether it was likely, in the drowning of persons of different ages and sexes, in a confined apartment (the cabin of a vessel), that one should have survived the other. An officer in the army died in November 1819, leaving a wife and two daughters, bequeathing property among them. In 1823, the Avidow married again, and by this second marriage, she had several children : one of these, a son, survived. One of the daughters by the first marriage, Margaret, died in 1825, before majority, intestate, and leaving only as next of kin, her sister Johanna and her mother. In 1834, the mother, her daughter Johanna, and her son, the last surviving child of the marriage between her and her second husband, were drowned on the coast of Norfollc, in the cabin of a sailing packet, while on their way to Scotland. The vessel filled with water from the sky-lights of the cabin diu'ing a storm. A few minutes before the catastrophe, aU in the cabin were seen and spoken to, but not one of them was heard to speak or was seen alive after the cabin had become filled with water, which is said to have happened in- stantaneously. The deaths of the mother, daughter, and son, were supposed to have taken place at one and the same instant of time, at least it could not be proved by the direct testimony of any person that he saw any one of the three alive, or that he heard the cry or speech of any one of these three, ailer the death of the other or either of them. It may be mentioned that the mother was corpulent, and, by the ill-treatment of her husband, a broken- hearted woman, about forty-two years of age ; the daughter was a stout healthy girl of about twenty, and the son about six years of age. Physical and constitutional strength were thus decidedly in favour of the survivorship of the daughter Johanna, who was in right of considerable funds at the time of her death, and she died intestate. A claim Avas made for her property bv her nearest blood relation, her paternal uncle german. Her mother's second husband being still alive, claimed the property, as the representative of his Avife, or his son, presuming that Johanna died before them, and that her property became vested in them. The opinion of Dr. Lushington being requested on this case, he stated that as to the question of surviA^orship, the presumption of laAV, in the absence of evidence to the contrary, Avas that the mother, daughter, and son all died at the same moment. The conseqiience Avould be, that none of the parties could transmit to the other. The paternal uncle would therefore be entitled to Johanna's property, on the principle ali-eady applied in so many cases, that the property being vested in her, those Av.io desire to take it on a presumption, must produce evidence to shoAv that she died before those persons through Avhom they set up a claim. In this case there Avas not the least ground, medically speaking, for assuming lhat one of these persons survived the other. There was no evidence as to Avhether they Avere in different parts of the cabin, or whether the water reached one before the other; and in the absence of all facts of this kind, it would be an arbitrary assumption to assign survivorship to one. It has been suj.poscd that Avhen males and females, and the yoimg and


[187/1290 b21964944_0187.jp2]

PRIORITY OF.DEATH. SURVIVORSHIP. 123 aged, are placed in exactly similar circumstances with regard to impending danger, that a male or adult would survive : but on what prhiciple can such an inference be drawn, when many inappreciable circumstances may have really led to the prior death of the male adult ? A case which was decided in America some years since, is calculated to show that a fixed arbitrary principle like that of the Roman law with regard to the death of husband and wife, must operate unjustly. (See case of Hugh Swinton Ball, p. 12G.) There is no doubt that the rules which influence English courts on these occasions are based on equitable principles. A right to property once ac([uired is not permitted to be taken away upon a mere preminption; the right may be averted by the production of satisfactory evidence, medical or general, but until this is brought forward, the property is considered to be vested in the holder and his heirs. Presumptions founded on age, sex, or the relative strength of the parties, are rather to be regarded as assumjitions inadmissible, except when most strongly supported by direct evidence. Under these circumstances it is scarcely necessary to refer to the rules which have been laid down by some medico-legal writers, in reference to the priority of death among persons who perish by a common cause, as by fire, starvation, suffocation, or cold. M. Devergie asserts that a female will survive a male adult when both are equally exposed to suffocation from carbonic acid; but a sufficient number of cases has not been observed to allow a fair inference on this point to be drawn; and very strong evidence would be required by an English judge to satisfy him that such an opinion Avas universally coiTCCt. As little can it be presumed that the yoimg perish from suffocation before the old. These events are commonly treated as involving circumstances which are from their nature unascertainable; and they are therefore dealt with according to fixed legal, and not according to medical rules. There are probably no two cases of death from a common cause, in which all the circumstances will be alike; hence any general medical rule for assigning survivorship to one in preference to another, is inapplicalile. The case of Underwood v. Wing, involving a singular question of survivor- ship, was brought before the Rolls' Court in July 1854. The opinions of Mr. Paget, Dr. Brinton, and myself were requested on one of the questions at issue in this case, namely, whether, under an apparently simultaneous death from drowning as a result of shipwreck, the husband survived the wile or tlie wife the husband for even the shortest period of time. The following is an outline of the facts:— ' Mr. Underwood, a man xt. 43, and his wife ret. 40, had a daughter aged 18 and two sons of the respective ages of 15 and 13. The husband and wife were entitled to some small property, and being about to go to Australia, with their children, they respectively made their wills, the one giving to the other absolutely, the whole of their respective properties, and by each such Avill, they declared, that if the one to whom the same was given should die ill t/ie lifetime of the donor, the property should go and be divided among their three children on their attaining majority; and that in case all their sjiid children died under 21, they then directed that their property should go to their mutiial friend, Mr. Wing, the defendant. Mr. Underwood was a tall powerful man with a full and broad chest, of the heiglit of six feet and one inch; he weighed about twelve stone. His wife was a little woman of rather delicate habit, not exceeding five feet two inches in height, and weighing between eight and nine stone. They, together with their three children, sailed from London on October 13, 1853, by the ship ' Dalhousie,' and were wrecked off Beachy Head. Every person on board, with the excep- tion of one seaman named Read, perished. Read stated that the ship foundered early in the morning of the 19th October, and went over cn ht:r


[188/1290 b21964944_0188.jp2]

PRIORITY OF DEATH. SURVIVORSHIP. 124 beam-ends, and so floated for about twenty minutes, and then went down. Shortly after she so went over, Mr. Underwood, Mrs. Underwood, and their two boys were pulled out of the cabin window on to the side of tlie ship, Mr, Underwood having nothing on but his coat and trousers, Mrs. Under- wood and the two boys being in their night-clothes. In the excitement of the moment, Mr. Underwood clasped his wife in his arms, and the boys clung to their mother: while in that position a heavy wave swept the four from the side of the ship into the sea, and as the sailor says, lie never saw them afterwards, so he presumes they all went down together. The daughter was seen on the deck shortly afterwards, and she Avas lashed by him to a spar and set adrift on the sea. She is supposed to have died almost im- mediately. It appeared from the evidence of Eead, the only witness of the facts, that he saw the daughter alive in the sea, after the spar of timber had been cast adrift, and long after the father, mother, and sons had been swept overboard. Upon the question of survivorship, as to Mr. or Mrs. Underwood or two sons, a great body of evidence was adduced. Mr. Wotton and Mr. Hancock were examined, and they deposed that the deaths of all the four, i.e. the father and mother and two sons, had been simultaneous. Other surgeons had been examined, who gave it as their opinion that Underwood, who was a strong man, and a good swimmer, must have survived his wife and children in the waves, and that a man accustomed to swim, would have it in his power to pre- serve his breath longer than a woman or boys so young as his two sons. Others thought that whilst the woman and her sons died of asphyxia, the man, being strong and muscular, might have died before them from an attack of apoplexy. The Master of the Rolls held that the weight of evidence as to Mrs. Underwood and the sons, was that they had been swept off the wreck at one and the same moment, and had perished simultaneously. The evidence of Kead, who conducted himself with great courage and humanity upon the occasion, appeared to be worthy of credence, and he decided that as respected these four individuals, there was no survivorship. With respect to the daughter Catherine it was established, beyond a doubt, as he thought, that she had been seen alive after her parents and brothers had perished in the raging sea. Then in her instance there was no doubt she survived them, and the result must be that the property could not vest in the defendant, but in the plaintiff, who was the next of kin of Catherine Underwood. The event upon which the defendant was to take, never arose, and the claim of the plaintiff, as next of kin, was fully established. The case was carried by appeal to the Lord Chancellor's Court, and subse- quently to the House of Lords. The point referred for our consideration was not whether the daughter survived the parents (as all the children died under the age of 21), but whether, upon ordinary physiological principles, the husband must not have survived the wife, or the wife the husband, and in either case the defendant would have a well-founded claim to the property. The plaintiff Underwood, a lady, and the next of kin of the husband, claimed the property on the ground that neither survived the other, and that both must have died together. Our opinions were to the effect that the great strength of the hvisband with the knowledge that he was a good swimmer, would justify a medical inference that he might probably have survived his wife, although only for a short period Further, we were ofopinion that, considering the nature of death by asphyxia even if husband and wife were submergedat the same instant of time, there was no'proof that they had really died at the same instant. Taking death to consist in the entire and permanent stoppage of the action of the heart, it could not be in fcu-red of these two persons, differing as they did in age, sex, and strength


[189/1290 b21964944_0189.jp2]

125 PEESUMPTION OF SURVIVORSIIIP. that the heart in each ceased to pulsate at the same fractional part of a second of time. Unless this physiological improbability, if not impossibility, were admitted, then it followed either that the husband survived the wife, or the Avife the husband, and in either case, Wing, the defendant, would take the property under the will of either. The case was heard by the Lord Chan- cellor (Cranworth), and two of the Common Law Judges; and in February 1855, the Lord Chancellor delivered the following judgment:— The Master of the Rolls held, that as the only title of the defendant rested upon a survivorship, it was incumbent upon him to make out his case. No such case had been made out, and therefore the plaintiff, as representing the next of kin, was entitled to the property. His Honour was also reported to have stated it to be his opinion that the evidence had the legal effect of proving that Mr. and Mrs. Underwood died at the same time. In this latter opinion the judges differed from the Master of the Rolls, but agreed with him on the main point, that the defendant had failed to make out his title. His Lordship in now giving judgment said, that he had had a conversation with the Master of the Rolls since the opinion of the judges had been given, and his Honour had stated that he did not mean, by any expressions he might liave used, to declare it to be his opinion that Mr. and Mrs. Underwood died ut the same time. All that he meant was, that in the absence of any positive evidence on the point, the property must go in the same way as if they had actually expired at the same moment. Without doubt it was almost im- possible that two human beings could die at the same moment. Time, like space, was divisible into infinitesimal part.=, and one of them might be con- sidered as having died a millionth part of a second before the other. The real point in the case, however, was that it was not known, and could not be ascertained, which of the two, the husband or the wife, was the survivor. The first and simple view of the case was, that a lady disposed of her pro- perty by will to a particular person in the event of her husband dying in her lifetime. Now, in the absence of any proof that the contingency upon which the gift depended had taken place, the property must be considered as undis- posed of, and the appeal would, as a matter of course, have been dismissed. An ingenious argument had, however, been made use of for the defendant, to the effect that, as there was a manifest intention in the will of Mrs. Underwood to dispose of her property in the event of her surviving her husband, the onus of proving that she did not survive him lay upon the parties dispviting the disposition, and a great number of cases had been cited in support of this view. His Lordship then analyzed the cases, and stated it to be his opinion that they did not affect the present case, and he therefore came to the conclusion that the decision of the Master of the Rolls was correct. The appeal must be dismissed, but, under the peculiar circum- stances of the case, without costs. Litigation did not stop here. The case was carried by appeal to the House of Lords, and in February ] 860, six years afler the commencement of the suit, a final judgment was given con- firming the decree of the Master of the Rolls and of Lord Cranworth, the then Lord Chancellor (Campbell) dissenting from this decision. The remarks made by Mr. Best, although published some years before the occurrence of this singular case, embrace the whole subject by anticipation. He says, ' The true conclusion seems to be, that the law of England recognizes no artificial presumption in cases of this nature; but leaves the real or sup- posed superior strength of the parties perishing by a common calamity to its natural weight, as a circumstance proper to be taken into consideration by a jury or judge called on to determine the question of survivorship, but which circumstance standing alone, is insufficient to shift the burden of proof. If, therefore, the party who, by laying claim to property on the ground of the


[190/1290 b21964944_0190.jp2]

12G PBIORITY OF DEATH. survivorship of one individual over another, takes upon himself the onus of proving that survivorship, has no fiirther evidence than the assumption that, from age or sex, one party struggled longer against their common death than his companion, it seems that no decree would have been made in favour of the claim. But, on the other hand, it is not quite correct to say that the law 2)resi(mes both to have perished at the same moment. This would be to establish an artificial presumption against manifest probability, although the practical consequence is in many cases the same; because if the party on whom the onus lies, cannot show affirmatively which died first, the question Avill necessarily be treated by the tribunal as a thing from its nature unascer- tainable, and that for all that appears to the contrary, both died at the same moment.' (Op. cit. 201). In reference to the case of Underwood v. Wing, it is obvious that the difficulty was created by the legal rule Avhich threw the onus of proof on the claimant under the two wills. The case for the next of kin, who Avas not mentioned in the will, was that the husband and wife died at the same instant of time; but this was a physiological impossibility; and had tin; proof of this been thrown upon the plaintiff the case must have failed. The contention of the defendant Avas that the testator and testatrix could not have died at the same instant. This negative proposition could not, of course, be proved by direct evidence; it became simply a medical inference : but when the law declares that in the absence of evidence the property shall go in the same way as if the parties had actually expired at the same instant, i. e. as if they had died intestate, this is deciding such questions by a rule which is as ai'bitrary in its operation, as that of the Code Napoleon. In Underwood v. "Wing tins rule of law practically affirmed that an event took place which was ])hysiologically impossible, and upon that event the wills of husband and wife were set aside, and the property was handed to one whose name was inten- tionally excluded from the wills of both. Hugh Swinton Ball, with his wife and adopted daughter, was lost on board the steamer ' Pulaske,' on the coast of America, on June 14, 1838. By his will ]\Ir. Ball bequeathed his property to his wife, and a claim was made by her heirs on the ground that she had survived her husband. It seems that an explosion took place on board the steamer at eleven o'clock at night, and that husband and Avife Avere in different parts of the vessel, and thus separated from each other. Mr. Ball Avas not seen after the explosion, and, although he perished Avith many others, the precise time at Avhich he died, could not be determined. Mrs. Ijall Avas seen after the explosion, rushing in a terrified manner about the deck, calling for her husband Avith the most piercing cries, but no reply Avas made. She Avas soon afterAvards missed, the promenade deck, to Avhich she had retreated, having been submerged Avith herself and all Avho were on it. Chancellor Johnson, before Avhom the case Av^as argued, said that it Avas a case to be decided by testimony, and as the right on the part of Mrs. Ball was de- rivative, the burden Avas on the plaintiffs to prove that she Avas the survivor. The evidence regarding the non-appearance of Mr. Ball, Avhen, had he been living, there was sufficient time for him to have' shoAvn himself, Avith others, on deck, and to have made an effort to join his Avife, Avas considered by the Chancellor to be conclusive of his death at the time that the Avife Avas seen and recognized by many Avho knew her. On these considerations he decided in favour of the plaintiffs, that the wife survived the husband and, therefore, succeeded to his estate. On appeal, in February, 184o' this decision Avas confirmed. ('American Journal of Med. Sci.' July'1845.) ' This case is peciiliar in the fiict that the Avife alone Avas seen living and the nature of the accident Avas such as to render it probable that the husband had perished in the explosion. The counsel for the defendants increniouslv


[191/1290 b21964944_0191.jp2]

127 prp:sumption of survivorship. ai'gued that as tlie death of the wife could be fixed, while that of the husband cuuld not be fixed, it was fair to presume that she died first, but this argument failed to satisfy the court. The plaintiffs were not reqiiired to prove when the husband really died: they established enough to render it probable that the wife was really the survivor. The following cases, one of which was tried in England and the other in Scotland, arose out of the fate of the expedition to the Polar seas, undertaken by Sir John Franklin in the year 1845. The first is that of Ommaney v, Stillwell^ Rolls Court, November, 1856. His Honour, in giving judgment, said that, although there was no point of law in it, it was one of great difficulty to decide upon, from the paucity and singidar nature of the evidence adduced. The sole question in the case was whether a father or son, i.e. James or Edward Couch, died first. James, the father, died in January, 1850. Of this there was no dispute. Edward, \\\^ son, went as mate on boai-d Sir John Franklin's ship 'Erebus'on the Arctic Expedition in August, 1845. The fact to be determined, was whether he Avas alive or dead, and, if dead, whether he predeceased his father or not. The only evidence on this point, was to be found in the statement of Dr. Eae upon the probable fate of Franklin and his crew. Dr. Rae stated that he discovered the remains of a nianber of persons, supposed to be part of the 133 persons who joined in Sir John Franklin's expedition, and in 1854 he was informed by some Esquimaux that in April or May, 1850, they saw a party of about thirty white men dragging a boat along, their ship being crushed up in the ice. Of these men, all were pulling or pushing at the boat but one, who appeared to be their leader, and was supposed by Dr. Rae to be Sir John Franklin. The Esquimaux further added that they saw the white men kill some birds which never visited that region before the month of May. Now, if this story ot" the Esquimaux could be relied upon, and it could in any way be shown that Edward Couch was among those persons whose remains Dr. Rae had dis- covered, there woidd be some kind of evidence, at any rate, to shoAv that Edward Couch, being alive in INIay, 1850, survived his father, James Couch, who died in January in that year. But there was nothing whatever to show that Edward Couch was one of these persons, or anything whatever that could satisfy his mind that Edward Couch was among these then survivors of Sir John Franklin's crew. One of the Chief Clerks of the Coui't had, liow- ever, decided in favour of the son having survived the father, and, as it was just as impossible to say whether he did so survive or not, the Court, for the ])urpose of avoiding further litigation, so far as lay in its power, would confirm tlio Chief Clerk's report. Decree accordingly. The second case came before the Court of Session in Scotland in 1857. The question at issue, was whether a naval officer who Avent out with the Franklin expedition was dead; and, if so, when must he be held to liave died. The late Adam Fah-holnie, who died in May, 1853, left his Avhole pro- perty to his nephew, James Walter Fairholme, lieutenant in the Royal Navy, who sailed from Northfieet, on board the 'Erebus,' for the North Seas, in May, 1845, and had not since been heard of. George Fairholme, another nephew, had instituted an action to have it found, under the destination of a codicil, that he was entitled to the whole of the testator's personal estate, valued at 37,509/. This was opposed by other relatives, whose interests depended on whether or not James Walter survived his father. Proof by commission was taken with the view of legally establishing the questions raised in the case, and among those examined were Dr. Rae, Sir John Richardson, James Hargreave, chief factor in the service of the Hudson's Bay Company, Captain Penney, and others. Dr. Rae expressed his belief that those per- sons who were reported to have been seen in the spring of 1850, must liave


[192/1290 b21964944_0192.jp2]

PRESUMPTION OP SURVIVORSHIP, 128 died in the May of that year, and these he believed to have been the last survivors of Franklin's party. James Hargreave thought that some of the party might have survived a single winter after they had been seen by the Esqui- maux in 1850, but certainly not longer. Sir John Richardson said : ' That if any of the party reached the country where they were said to have been seen at the end of the winter of 1849-50, it was impossible for them^to survive a single year with any means they could have at their disposal.' Captain Penney remarked : ' I do not think that any of the party could have survived 1852 ; they must either have perished of hunger, or from the hostile attacks of the natives.' The Lord Ordinary (Mackenzie) reported the Avhole cir- cumstances of the case to the Inner House, expressing his own opinion^ that there was thus strong presumptive evidence that Lieutenant Fairholme perished together with his companions some time prior to the end of 1852, and conse- quently that he predeceased his uncle, the testator, who died in May, 1853. His Lordship thought that in these circumstances the pursuer, George Fair- holme, was entitled to a decree in his favour, but qualified by this condition, that before payment, he should grant a bond with sufficient security to warrant the defender against all hazard from any claim to the money decerned for, by Lieutenant Fairholme, or others in his right. It would seem from an old case, Broiujhtoti v. Randall (* Croke's Elizabeth,' 503), that provided there be some direct evidence, a very small amount of proof is recjuired for survivorship. A father and son were seised as joint tenants and to the heirs of the son. Both father and son were hanged at the same time, in one cart; but because the son, as deposed to by some of the witnesses, survived, as appeared by the shaking of his legs and probably some other tokens, the wife was held entitled to her dower ! (Best, op. cit., 194.) There has been much ingenious discussion as to the survivorship of the mother or child, when both die during delivery, and nothing is known respecting their deaths. So far as I am aware this question has only occurred once in an old case, quoted by Dr. Beck; and then some local German court arbitrarily decided that the child survived the mother, basing its decision, according to Valentin, upon the grounds—1. that the mother Avas exhausted by the labour, and 2. that the infant Avould not have died, until deprived by the death of the mother of its nourishment. Now it is quite possible that the child might have died soon after its birth, and the mother have sxirvived: at any rate the medical reasons for this view are just as good and just as forcible as those against it, and the only equitable mode of dealing with such cases, when a legal question of a right to property is dependent on the decision, is to treat them according to the principles followed in contested survivorship. Those who would benefit by the presumption that the child survived the mother should be required to adduce satisfactory proofs. In some cases of presumed survivorship medical evidence may be of service, —as where two persons are foimd dead from wounds aflfecting different parts, and these wounds are of different degrees of severity,—or where two are found dead from any cause, and the body of the one is cold and rigid, while that of the other is Avarm and pliant: here we have medical facts which may serve to guide the court, and enable it to come to a correct decision. In one case, where husband and wife were found dead, both severely wounded and the bodies burnt. Dr. Ollivier remarked that the burns on the body of the wife had the characters of those which are produced during life, Avhile those on the body of the husband were exactly like burns which are caused after death. He thence inferred, as they were exposed to the same cause of burning, that the wife survived the husband; for he considered that all signs of vitality must have ceased in him before the fire could have reached his body.


[193/1290 b21964944_0193.jp2]

DEFINITION OF A POISON. 129 POISONING. CHAPTER 8. DEFINITION OF THE TERM POISON DEADLY POISONS—MECHANICAL IRRITANTS INFLUENCE OF HABIT AND IDIOSYNCRASY CLASSIFICATION SPECIAL CHARACTERS OF IRRITANT, CORROSIVE, AND NEUROTIC POISONS. Definition.—A Poison is commonly defined to be a substance, which, Avhen administered or taken in small quantity, is capable of acting delete- riously on the body: in popular language, this term is applied only to those substances which destroy life in small doses. This popular view of the nature of a poison is too restricted for the purposes of medical jurisprudence. I It woiild obviously exclude numerous compounds, the poisonous properties of ' which cannot be disputed—as, for example, the salts of copper, tin, zinc, lead, and antimony; these, generally speaking, act as poisons only when adminis- tered in large doses. Some substances, such as nitre, have not been observed to have a noxious action except when taken in large quantity, while arsenic acts as a poison in a small dose ; but in a medico-legal view, whether a man dies from the effects of an ounce of nitre, or two grains of arsenic, the responsibility of the person who criminally administers the substance, is the same. Each may be regarded as a poison, differing from the other only in its degree of activity, and in its mode of operation. The result is the same; death is caused by the substance taken, and the quantity required to destroy life, even if it could be always accurately determined, cannot enable us to distinguish a poisonous from a non-poisonous substance. If, then, a medical Avitness be asked 'What is a poison?' he must beware of adopting this popular definition, or of confining the term poison to a substance which is capable of , operating as such in a small dose taken at once. j In legal medicine, it is difficult to give such a definition of a poison as I shall be entirely free from objection. Perhaps the most comprehensive I which can be suggested is this:—'A poison is a substance which, when I absorbed into the blood, is capable of seriously affecting health or of destroying life.' There are various channels by which poisons enter the blood : some are in the form of gases or vapours : these operate rapidly through the lungs; others are liquid or solid, and these may reach the blood either through the skin or through a wound: but more commonly through the lining membrane of the stomach or boAvels, as when they are taken or administered in the ordinary manner. The latter chiefly give rise to medico- legal investigations. Some substances act as poisons, by any one of these channels: thus arsenic is a poison whether it enters the blood through the lungs, the skin, or the stomach and bowels: but such poisons as those of the viper, of rabies, and of glanders, appear to affect the body only through a wound in the skin. When introduced into the stomach, these animal poisons have been found to be inert. In adopting the above definition of a poison in a medical sense, it is proper to remark that there are some substances which K


[194/1290 b21964944_0194.jp2]

130 MEDICAL DEFINITION OF A POISON. are regarded as poisons, although absorption into the blood does not appear to be necessary to their action. The mineral acids and alkalies belong to this class of bodies. They are corrosive poisons: they operate injuriously by causing the destruction of living parts ; and whether applied to the skin, the stomach, or (in the form of vapour) to the air-cells of the lungs, they destroy life by the local changes to which they give rise, and the iiiHamma- tion which is a consequence of their action. It is not easy to define the boundary between a medicine and a poison. It is usually considered that a medicine in a large dose is a poison, and a poison in a small dose is a medicine; but a medicine such as tartarized antimony may be easily converted into a poison, by giving it in small doses at short intervals, either xmder states of the l)ody not adapted to receive it, or in cases in which it exerts an injuriously depressing effect. Some deaths have been lately occasioned by this wiliul misuse of antimony in doses which miglit be described as medicinal, although in the cases referred to, no other intention could have existed, in the secret administration of this substance, than that of destroying life. A person may die either from a large dose of a substance given at once, or from a number of small doses given at such intervals that the system cannot recover from the effects of one before another is administered. This remark applies to a great number of medi- cines which are not commonly included in a list of poisons. In reference to the medical definition of a poison, it is necessary to observe that the law docs not regard the manner in Avhich the substance administered acts. If it be capable of destroying life or of injuring health, it is of little importance, so i'lxr as the responsibility of a prisoner is concerned, Avhether its action on the body is of a mechanical or chemical nature, and whether it operates fatally by absorption into the blood or not. Thus a substance which simply acts mechanically on the stomach or bowels may, if wilfully administered with intent to injure, involve a person in a criminal charge, as much as if he had administered arsenic or any of the ordinary poisons. It is, then, necessary that we should consider what the law strictly means by the act of poisoning. If the substance criminally administered, destroys life, whatever may be its nature or mode of operation, the accused is tried on a charge of murder or manslaughter, and the duty of a medical witness consists in showing that the substance taken was the certain cause of death. If, however, deatli be not the consequence, then the accused may be tried for the attempt to murder by poison (24 & 25 Vict. c. 100, s. II, Aug. 18GI). The words of this statute are general, and embrace all kinds of substances, whether they are popularly or professionally regarded as poisons or not. Thus it is laid down that— ' Whosoever shall administer, or cause to be administered to or taken by any person, any poison, or other destructive thing, with intent to commit murder,-shall be guilty of felony.' Whether the administering be followed by any bodily injury or not, the act is still a felony, provided the intent has been to commit murder. The attempt to administer or the attempt to cause to be administered to, or to be taken by any person, any poison or other destructive thing, with the like intent, although no bodily injury be effected, is also a I'elony (s. 14). If any doubt formerly existed whether the external application of poisons, e. g. by wounds or ulcerated surfaces, would be included in the words ' administeriniT or taking,' they are now entirely removed by the Criminal Law Consolidation Act (Aug. 1861). The 22nd section specially applies to such an offence and the 15th section provides that ' Whosoever shall, by any means other than those specified in any of the preceding sections of this Act, attempt to commit murder, shall be guilty of felony.' Mr. Greaves justly'remarks


[195/1290 b21964944_0195.jp2]

131 LEGAL DEFINITION. with regard to this important addition to the statute law, that * the malicious may now rest satisfied that every attempt to murder which their perverted ingenuity may devise, or their fiendish malignity suggest, Avill fall within some clause of this Act, and may be visited with penal servitude for life.' (' Notes on Crim. Law Consolidation,' p. 49.) Under sect. 22 of this statute, in reference to attempted poisoning, some offences are comprised, which formerly escaped punishment: 'Whosoever shall unlawfully apply or administer to, or cause to be tfiken by, or attempt to apply or administer to, or attempt to cause to be administered to or taken by any person, any chloroform, laudanum, or other stupetying or overpowering drug, matter, or thing, with intent, in any of such cases, thereby to enable himself or any other person to commit, or with intent, &c. to assist any other person in committing any indictable offence, shall be guilty of felony.' A case luider this section of the new statute Avas referred to me in September 18G3. A medical gentleman was charged with ' attempting to cause to be administered' to an infant, a poisonous dose of laudanum. It was stated by a woman who nursed the child that the accused delivered to her two bottles containing a brown liquid, labelled ' one teaspoonful every three hours,' and directed her to give it to the child. None was given. Some months after the death of the child fi:om natural causes, this charge was raised, and the bottles, still full of liquid, Avere produced as evidence against the accused. On analysis I foimd that the prescribed dose contained aboiit five minims of laudanum, or nearly one half-grain of opium—a dose likely to proA'e fatal to an infant only a month old. Assuming the statement of the nurse who made the charge to be true, the only inference to be draAvn from the prescription of such a dose for an infant by a medical man, would be that he intended to destroy the life of the child. The charge fell to the gi-ound, as clear proof was given that the Avoman who made it Avas not to be believed on her oath, and that it had originated in a desire to extort money. Poison is not always administered Avith intent to murder. On many occasions it has been mixed Avith food, and thus administered Avith a view to injure or annoy a person. Cantharides have been thus frequently given, and in one instance (Nov. 1859) eight members of a family suffered from severe symptoms of poisoning by reason of the Avanton administration of this drug. In April 1860, several members of a family suffered from severe sickness, as a result of tobacco having been put into water contained in a teakettle; and tartar emetic has been in some cases dissolved in beer or other liquids as a mere frolic, Avithout any proved or probable intention on the part of the offender to destroy life. The case of 3/^Mulle/i (Liverpool Autumn Assizes, 1856), revealed an extensive system of poisoning in the northern counties, in Avhich tartar emetic Avas the substance employed. This drug, mixed with cream of tartar, Avas openly sold by druggists under the name of' quietness poAvders,' and the evidence established that Avomen gave these powders to their husbands with a vieAV to cure them of habits of drunkenness. Hitherto, Avhen the intent to murder Avas not proved, the offender has escaped, although great bodily injury may have been done by his Avanton or malicious act. Sections 23, 24, and 25 of the Consolida- tion Act, c. 100, provide for this omission : — ' 23. Wliosoever shall unlaAvfully and maliciously administer to, or cause to be administered to or taken by any other person, any poison or other destructive or noxious thing, so as thereby to endanger the life of such person, or so as thereby to inflict upon such person any grievous bodily harm, shall be guilty of felony.' ' 24. Whosoever shall unlawfully and maliciously administer to, or cause to be administered to or taken by any other person, any poison or other K 2


[196/1290 b21964944_0196.jp2]

132 POISONS AXD NOXIOUS THINGS. destructive or noxious tiling, with intent to injure, aggrieve, or annoy sucli person, shall be guilty of a misdemeanor.' ' 25. If, upon the trialof any person charged with the felony above mentioned, the jury shall not be satisfied that such person is guilty thereof, but shall be satisfied that he is guilty of the misdemeanor above mentioned, then and m every such case the jury may acquit the accused of such felony, and find him guilty of such misdemeanor.' It will be perceived that the words of the statute leave the question ' What is a poison ? ' to depend upon the medical evidence adduced : and in order to include all substances of an injurious nature, although they may not be strictly speaking poisons, the words ' destructive or noxious thing ' are employed. Hence, on these occasions, a medical witness must be prepared to prove that the substance was either a poison or a destructive or noxious thing. In a trial Avhich took place at the Essex Lent Assizes, 1850 {Reg. v. Ilcn/iuard), a woman was charged with administering ivhite precipitate to her husband with intent to kill. She was acquitted on the ground that there was no evidence to show that white precipitate was either a poison or a destructive thing. It is, however, placed beyond doubt that this substance is not only capable of producing all the effects of an irritant poison, but of destroying human life; hence, ihis acquittal was based on a pure mistake. White hellebore, Lobelia inflata, and Oil of turpentine have been erroneously pronounced not to be poisons under similar circumstances ; in fact, Avhen this question is raised, unless the medical evidence received by a Court, be very closely investigated, great mistakes may arise, owing perhaps to want of experience or want of reflection on the part of those to whom the question is put. The quantity of a poisonous substance found in an article of food, or in a dead body, does not affect the culpability of a person indicted for adminis- tering it. In the case of Hartkij (C. C. C. May 12, 1850), in which an attempt was made to administer sulphuric acid mixed with coffee, Cresswell J. stated—if poison be administered with intent to murder, it is not necessary there should be enough in the article administered to cause death. If any poison be there, and the intent be proved, the crime of attempting to administer poison is complete. Erie J. ruled to the same effect, in reference to the discovery of a small quantity of arsenic in a dead body, in Reg. v. Bacon (Lincoln Summer Assizes, 1857). In Reg. v. Southgate (Chelmsford Lent Assizes), Parke B. said, in reply to an objection taken, it M^as quite immaterial to define or prove in what vehicle a poison was given, or whether it was administered in a solid or liquid state. This question, ' What is a poison ? ' may present itself under another aspect. In The Queen V. Cluderay (Exchequer Chamber, January 19, 1849), the prisoner was indicted fur administering poison with intent to murder. He was proved to have administered to a child nine weeks old, two berries in the husk, of Cocculus Indicus, and the berries passed through the body of the child Avithout doing any injury. It was submitted for the prisoner, that being in the husk, they could not be considered a poison. The point w^as reserved by Williams J., who tried the case at York. It was now contended for the prisoner, that although the kernel of this nut was poisonous, still having been given in the luisk, which was hard of digestion, it could not be considered an administering of poison within the statute. The Chief Justice said the Court was of opinion that, when a man administered something that was poison with intent to murder, but in such a way that it did not act, he was guilty. Conviction affirmed. This is the only reasonable view to take of such an objection. The seed contains the poison, but the husk is inert: nevertheless the berry as a whole must be regarded as a poison.


[197/1290 b21964944_0197.jp2]

MECHANICAL IRRITANTS. INFLUENCE OF HABIT. 133 Deadb/ Poison.—The term ' deadly ' can only be applied with propriety to those poisons which may prove speedily fatal in small doses, e. g. prnssic acid, arsenic, strychnia, aconitina, and nicotina; and although it has been used in indictments in reference to such substances as blue or green vitriol, and common sal volatile, this has arisen from an imnecessarily strict adherence to old legal forms. In a case {Reg. v. Haijdon^ Somerset Spring Assizes, 1845), in which * spirit of hartshorn ' was thus described as a ' deadly poison,' and an objection was taken to the validity of the indictment, the learned judge (Erie J.) held that the Avord deadly was not essential; it Avas mere surplusage (' Law Times,'April 12, 1845). Mechanical Irritants.—The substance administered may not be a poison in the medical signification of the term, and it may not be popularly considered as such ; yet, Avhen taken, it may be noxious to health or destructive to life. We haA'-e examples of substances of this description in iron-filings, poAvdered glass, sponge, pins and needles, and such like bodies, Avhich have been administered with the Avilful design of injuring, and have on various occasions given rise to criminal charges. In cases of this kind, the legal guilt of a prisoner may often depend on the meaning assigned by a medical Avitness to the words destructive thing. Thus, to take an example, liquid mercury might be poured doAvn the throat of an infant, with the deliberate intention to destroy it. A question of a purely medical nature Avill then arise Avhether mercury be a ' destructive thing' or not; and the conviction of a' prisoner Avill probably depend on the ansAver. Should a difference of opinion exist, an occurrence by no means imusual in medical CA'idence, the prisoner Avill, according to the humane principle of our laAV, receive the benefit of the doubt. Influence of Habit on Poisons.—Habit, it is well knoAvn, diminishes the effects of certain poisons:—thus it is that opium, when frequently taken by a person, loses its effect for a time, and requires to be administered in a much larger dose. Indeed, confirmed opium-eaters have been enabled to take at once, a quantity of the drag Avhich would have infallibly killed them, had they commenced with it in the first insfcmce. Even infants and children, who are well knoAvn to be especially susceptible of the effects of opium, and are liable to be poisoned by small doses, may, by the influence of habit, be brought to take the drug in very large quantities. This is well illustrated by a statement made by Mr. Grainger, in the 'Report of the Children's Employment Commission.' It appears that the system of drugging children Avith opium in the factory districts, commences as soon after birth as possible; and the dose is gradually increased until the child takes from fifteen to tAventy drops of laudanum at once ! This has the effect of throAving it into a lethargic stupor. Healthy children of the same age would be killed by a dose of five drops. The same influence of habit is manifested more or less in the use of tobacco, alcohol, ether, chloroform, morphia, strychnia, and other alkaloids. Dr. Christison has remarked that this influence is chiefly confined to poisons derived from the organic kingdom : it is so limited Avith regard to mineral substances that it can scarcely be said to exist. The stories related of the arsenic-eaters of Styria, and the corrosive sublimate-eaters of Turkey, are therefore to be received with great distrust. There is no satisfactory evidence that any human being has ever accustomed himself, by habit, to take these substances daily in doses that would prove poisonous to the generality of adults. M. Flandin states that he gave to dogs doses of arsenic in poAvder, commencing with l-65th of a grain mixed with their food; and that in nine months, by progressive increase, they bore doses of upwards of fifteen grains of arsenious acid in poAvder in tAventy-four hours, without becoming affected in appetite or health! ('Traite des Poisons,' vol. 1, p. 737.) This is


[198/1290 b21964944_0198.jp2]

loi INFLUENCE OF HABIT. ALLEGED AKSENIC-EATING. contrary to all experience in the medicinal use of arsenic in the human subject; for, as it Avill be seen hereafter, a slight increase of a medicinal dose has often been attended Avith such alarming symptoms, as to render a discontinuance of the medicine absolutely necessary to the safety of the person. The most singular part of M. Flandin's statement, is that the arsenic thus given, ai)pears to have remained in the body of the animal without causing injury ! Thus he states that he examined the urine of the animals while living, without detecting appreciable traces of arsenic. The arsenic must, however, have undergone some rapid and extraordinary metamorphosis, for, in killing the animals on the third day, after the last dose had been given, none could be detected in their viscera, their flesh, or their bones! Such a state of things is inconsistent with all that has been hitherto acquired by experience regarding the operation of this or other poisons. Further observations are required before it can be admitted that dogs by habit can SAvallow fifteen grains of arsenic at a dose without the production of symp- toms of poisoning; and at the same time no trace of the poison be detected in the urine while the animal is living, or in the body three days after its death. In reference to the Styrian practice of arsenic-eating, Dr. Roscoe has published a case in which, according to information supplied to him, a Styrian took in one day 41 grains of white arsenic, and on the day following, 5^ grains, crushing the mineral between his teeth and swallowing it. The day after he had swallowed the second dose, the man left the place in his usual health, and there is no further record of him. Such a case as this admits of no explana- tion on English experience. Habit appears to have so little influence on this substance under the most careful medicinal use in this country, that I believe no medical practitioner has ever succeeded in causing a patient to take two grains at a dose (the smallest quantity yet known to have destroyed life). Mr. Hunt, who has perhaps more extensively employed arsenic than other practitioners, fixes the maximum dose at one grain (two drachms of FoAvler's solution). In Dr. Eoscoe's informant's case, the man swallowed, in two doses, on two successive days, a quantity of arsenic equivalent to two ounces and a half of Fowler's mineral solution ! i. e. suflScient to kill five adults. There is, however, a difiiculty in assigning the alleged tolerance of this poison merely to habit. Dr. Roscoe quotes from Dr. Schiifer, ' a most important case of administration of no less than 555 grains of arsenic to a horse in twenty-three days, without any evil effects being produced.' It is not stated that the animal began to take arsenic in early life ; and habit could have had but little influence in three weeks on the large quantity here given, even admitting that small doses were given at first, and that these were gradually increased. As no evil effects were produced, the only inference is, that by some speciality of organisation, arsenic was not a poison to this animal. There are on record several instances of human beings having recovered from very large doses. Dr. Eoscoe's pamphlet satisfactorily shows that symptoms of acute poisoning, gastro-enteritis and death, are sooner or later the results of the adoption of til is dangerous practice in Styria. It would be difficult to persuade an English peasant, however ill-educated, that he could safely put into his daily food a substance which he used for destroying vermin,—or an English woman that she could safely take, to improve her personal attractions, a mineral which pregnant women were in the habit of using to procure abortion (p. 7). It is a strange and inexplicable circumstance, if this practice exists, that the medico-legal writers of Germany have not dealt with the question by a proper investigation of the alleged facts. In the recently publislied elaborate work of Casper (' Practisches liandbuch der gerichtlichen Medicin^ 1857-8),


[199/1290 b21964944_0199.jp2]

135 INFLUENCE OF IDIOSYNCEASY. although the subject of arsenical poisoning is very fully treated, there is no reference to the existence of a class of toxophagists in Styria. The recent works of Bocker, Bock, and Otto, as well as the German Quarterly Journals devoted to Legal Medicine, are equally silent on the alleged practice. (See a paper by M. Kopp, ' Moniteur Scientifique,' Mars 1861, liv. 101, p. 106.) The alleged impunity of the Styrians, in the habitual use of arsenic, may be occasionally quoted to explain the detection of the poison in a dead body or a motive for its purchase ; but no scientific witness who has seen anything of the operation of arsenic, can allow these statements to influence his opinion of its efi'ects on human beings. Those who profess to believe in this practice, would be among the last to make a trial of it either on their own pei'sons or among their friends. The only form in which I have known the question of habit to be seriously raised in medical jurisprudence is this: whether, while the more prominent effects of a poison are thereby diminished, the insidious or latent efi'ects on the constitution, are at the same time counteracted. The answer is of some importance in relation to the subject of life insurance:—for the conceal- ment of the practice of opium-eating by a person whose life was insured, has already given rise to an action, in which medical evidence cn this subject was rendered necessary. As a general principle, we must admit that habit cannot altogether counteract the insidious effects of poisons; and that the practice of taking them is liable to give rise to disease or to impair the constitution. Iiif uence of Idiosyncrasy.—Idiosyncrasy differs fit-om habit:—it does not, like habit, diminish the effect of a poison : for it is not commonly found that any particular state of body is a safeguard against the effects of these power- ful agents. Some constitutions are observed to be much more affected than others by certain poisons : thus opium, arsenic, mercury, lead, and antimony are substances of this description, and this difference in their effect is ascribed to idiosyncrasy. Dr. Christison mentions a remarkable instance, in Avhich a gentleman unaccustomed to the use of opium, took nearly an ounce of laudanum without any effect. (' On Poisons,' 33.) This form of idiosyn- crasy is very rare. Certain substances generally reputed harmless, and, indeed, used as articles of food, are observed to affect some persons like poisons. This is the case with pork, certain kinds of shell-fish, and mush rooms. There may be nothing poisonous in the food itself; but it acts as a poison in particular constitutions—whether from its being in these cases a poison ^)er se, or rendered so by changes during the process of digestion, it is difficult to say. The subject of idiosyncrasy is of importance in a medico- leo-al view when symptoms resembling those of poisoning, follow a meal con- sisting of a particular kind of food. In such a case, Avithout a knowledge of this peculiar condition, Ave might hastily atti-ibute to poison, effects which Avere really due to another cause. It Avould appear that in some instances idiosyncrasy may be acquired—i. e. a person avIio, at one period of his life, had been in the habit of partaking of a particular kind of food Avithout injury, may find at another period that it Avill disagi-ee Avith him. When pork has been disused as an article of diet for many years it cannot ahvays be resumed Avith impunity. In cases in which the poAvers of life have become enfeebled by age, the susceptibility of the system to poisons is increased; thus aged persons may be killed by comparatively small doses of ai-senic and opium. Cases of acquired idiosyncrasy are very rare ; it appears to be, if Ave may so apply the term, a congenital condition. There are, hoAvever, certain diseases Avhich appear to confer a power of supporting large and even poisonous doses of some substances. Very large doses of opium have been taken Avithout producing dangerous symptoms by persons labouring


[200/1290 b21964944_0200.jp2]

136 CLASSIFICATION OF POISONS. under tetanus and hydrophobia. This condition is called tolerance. It has been witnessed in diseases of the lungs in reference to the use of antimonial medicines. Classification of Poisons.—Poisons have been divided into three classes, according to their mode of action on the system; namely, Irritants, Narcotics, and Narcotico-Irritants. This classification is a modification of that originally proposed by Orfila. The Narcotics and Narcotico-irritants may, however, be regarded as constituting one large class, the Neurotics, as their special action is to affect directly one or more parts of the nervous system. The Neurotic poisons admit of a subdivision into Cerebral, Spinal, and Cerebro-spinal, according to whether the poisonous substance affects directly the brain, the spinal marrow, or both of these organs. Irritants.—The irritants are possessed of these common characters. Wlien taken in ordinary doses, they occasion speedily violent vomiting and purging. Ihe symptoms are either accompanied or followed by pain in the stomach and bowels. The peculiar effects of the poison are manifested chiefly on these organs, which, as their name implies, they irritate and inflame. Many substances belonging to this class of poisons possess C9rrosive properties ; such as the strong mineral acids, caustic alkalies, bromine, corrosive sublimate, and others. These, in the act of swallowing, are commonly accompanied by an acrid or burning taste, extending from the mouth down the gullet to the stomach. Some irritants do not possess any corrosive action—of which we have examples in arsenic, the poisonous salts of barj^ta, carbonate of lead, and cantharides ; these are often called pure irritants. They exert no destructive chemical action on the tissues with which they come in contact; they simply irritate and inflame them. Difference between Corrosive and Irritant Poisons.—As a result of the action of corrosive poisons, symptoms are commonly manifested immediately, be- cause mere contact produces the destruction of a part. In the action of the purely irritant poisons, the symptoms are generally more slowly manifested, rarely showing themselves until at least half an hour has elapsed from the time of swallowing the substance. Of course, there are exceptions to this remark ; for sometimes irritants act speedily, though rarely with the rapidity of corrosive poisons. It is important in a practical view, to ascertain whether, in an unknown case, the poison which a person, requiring immediate treat- ment, may have swallowed, is irritant or corrosive. This may be commonly determined by a knowledge of the time at which the symptoms appeared after the siispected substance was taken. We may thus often easily distinguish between a case of poisoning from arsenic and one from corrosive sublimate. There is also another point which may be noticed. As the corrosive substance exerts a decidedly chemical action, an examination of the mouth and throat may enable us in some cases to solve the question. It has already been stated that there are many irritant poisons which have no corrosive properties, but every corrosive may act as an irritant. Thus the action of corrosive sublimate is that of an irritant poison, as, while it desti-oys some parts of the coats of the stomach and intestines, it irritates and inflames others. So again most corrosive poisons may lose their corrosive properties by dilution with water, and then they act simply as irritants. This is the case with the mineral acids, and bromine. In some instances, it is not easy to say whether an irritant poison possesses corrosive properties or not. Thus oxalic acid acts immediately, and blanches and softens the mucous membrane of the mouth and throat, but I have not met with any decided marks of chemical corrosion produced by it in the stomach or viscera. Irritant poisons for the most part, belong to the mineral kingdom ; and they may be divided into the Non-metalhc and Metallic irritants. There are a few derived from the


[201/1290 b21964944_0201.jp2]

137 NEUROTIC POISONS. animal and vegetable kingdom; bvit these, if we except cantharides, are not often employed criminally. Some of the gases likewise belong to the class of irritant jDoisons. Neurotics.—Neurotic poisons act upon the nervous system, and their opera- tion is confined chiefly to the brain and spinal marrow. Either immediately or some time after the poison has been swallowed, the patient suffers from head-ache, giddiness, numbness, paralysis, stupor, and in some instances con- vulsions. They have not an acrid burning taste like the corrosive irritants; and they rarely give rise to vomiting or purging. When these symptoms follow the ingestion of the poison into the stomach, the effect may be generally ascribed either to the form or quantity in which it has been taken, and the mechanical effect on the stomach thereby produced, or to the poison being combined Avith some irritating substance, such as alcohol. The pure narcotics^ or Cerebral poisons, are not found to irritate or inflame the stomach and bowels. Notwithstanding the well-defined boundary thus apparently existing be- tween these two classes of poisons, it must not be supposed that the substances arranged in each class, always act in the manner indicated. Some ii-ritants have been observed to affect the brain or the spinal marrow, and this may be either a primary or a secondary consequence of their action. Arsenic and oxalic acid, although classed as irritants, have in some instances given rise to symptoms closely resembling those of narcotic poisoning ; namely, coma, paralysis, and tetanic convulsions. In a case of poisoning by arsenic, which occurred to Dr. Morehead, of Bombay, the symptoms of narcotism were so strongly marked, that it was believed at first the man had taken a nar- cotic. (' Med. Gaz.' vol. 43, p. 1055.) I have met with a case of poisoning by arsenic in which there was paralysis of the limbs, with an entire absence of purging, during the eight days that the deceased survived. On the other hand, in a case of j^oisoning by a large dose of opium, there was an absence of the usual symptoms of cerebral disturbance, and the presence of others resembling those of irritant poisoning—namely, pain and vomiting. Thus, then, we must not allow ourselves to be misled by the idea tliat the symptoms are always clearly indicative of the kind of poison taken. The narcotic or cerebral poisons are few in numbei-, and belong to the vegetable kingdom. Some of the poisonous gases possess a narcotic action. Narcotico-Trritants. (Spinal and Cerebrospinal Poisons.)—Poisons be- longing to this class have, as the name implies, a compound action. They are chiefly derived from the vegetable kingdom. At variable periods after they have been swallowed, they give rise to vomiting and piu'ging, like irri- tants ; and sooner or later produce stupor, coma, paralysis and convulsions, owing to their effects on the brain and spinal marrow. In the state of vegetables, as leaves, seeds, or roots, they possess the property, like irritants, of irritating and inflaming the stomach and bowels. As familiar examples we may point to nux vomica, monkshood, hemlock, and poisonous mushrooms. This class of poisons is very numerous, embracing a large variety of well- known vegetable substances; but they rarely form a subject of difficulty to a medical practitioner. The flict of the symptoms occurring after a meal at which some suspicious vegetables may have been eaten, coupled with the nature of the symptoms themselves, will commonly indicate the class to which the poison belongs. Some of these poisons have a hot acrid taste; others, like aconite or monkshood, produce a sense of numbness or tingling, while others again have an intensely bitter taste, as nux vomica, strychnia, veratria, and picrotoxia. Strychnia may be regarded as a pure spinal poison.


[202/1290 b21964944_0202.jp2]

EVIDENCE OF POISONING IN THE LIVING. 138 CHAPTER 9. EVIDENCE OF POISONING IN THE LIVING SUBJECT ACTION OF POISONS INCREASED OR DIMINISHED BY DISEASE SYMPTOMS CONNECTED WITH FOOD OR MEDICINE SEVERAL PERSONS ATTACKED SIMULTANEOUSLY EVIDENCE FllOM THE DETECTION OF POISON IN THE FOOD. We now proceed to consider the evidence of poisoning in the living subject. To the practitioner the diagnosis of a case of poisoning is of great importance, as by mistaking the symptoms produced by a poison for those arising from natural disease, he may omit to employ the remedial measures Avhich have been found efficacious in counteracting its effects, and thus lead to the certain death of the patient. To a medical jui'ist a correct knowledge of the symp- toms furnishes the chief evidence of poisoning, in those cases in which persons are charged with the malicious and unlawful administration of poison. The symptoms produced during life, constitute also an important part of the evi- dence in those instances in Avhich a poison proves fatal. At present, however, Ave will suppose the case to be, that poison has been taken and the pati(Uit survives. Most toxicological writers have laid down certain characters whereby it is said symptoms of poisoning may be distinguished from those of disease. 1. In poisoning^ the symptoms appear suddenly, while the individual is in health.—It is the common character of most poisons, when taken in the large doses in which they are usually administered with criminal intent, to produce serious symptoms, either immediately or within a very short period after they have been swallowed. Their operation, under such circumstances, cannot be suspended, and then manifest itself after an indefinite interval; although this Avas formerly a matter of imivers£il belief, and gave rise to many absurd accounts of Avhat was termed sloiv poisoning. The symptoms of poisoning by nicotina, prussic acid, oxalic acid, or the salts of strychnia, appear immediately, or generally Avithin a A'ery few minutes aiter the poison has been swalloAved. In an exceptional case, in Avhich the dose of prussic acid Avas small, and insufficient to produce death, the poison Avas supposed by the patient not to have begun to act until after the lapse of fifteen minutes. ('Ed. Med. and Surg. Journ.' vol. 59, p. 72.) The symp- toms caused by arsenic and other irritants, and, indeed, by all poisons gene- rally, aie commonly manifested in from half an hour to an hour. It is rare that the appearance of symptoms is protracted for two hours, except imder certain peculiar states of the system. It is said that some neurotic poisons, such as the poisonous mushrooms, may remain in the stomach twelve or twenty-four hours Avithout giving rise to symptoms; and this is also affirmed to be the case Avith some animal irritants, such as decayed meat; but Avith regard to the first point, it has been shoAvn by Dr. Peddie that mushrooms have produced symptoms in half an hour ; and a case has fallen tinder my own observation, in Avhich the symptoms from noxious animal food came on Avilhin as short a time after the meal, as is commonly observed in in-itaut poisoning by mineral substances. In some cases of poisoning by phosphorus, no symptoms have occurred until after the lapse of some hours. Inftiience of Disease.—A diseased state of the body may render a person comparatively unsusceptible of the action of certain poisons, Avhile in other instances it may increase their action, and render them fatal in small doses. In dysentery and tetanus a person may take, Avithout being materially afifected, a quantity of opium sufficient to kill an adult in average health. In mania, cholera, hysteria, and delirium tremens, large doses oi" opium may be borne Avith comparative impunity (p. 135). In a case of hemiplegia, a Avoman ^t. 29,


[203/1290 b21964944_0203.jp2]

MODE OF OCCURRENCE OF SYMrTOMS. 139 took for six days, three grains of strychnia daily Avithoiit injurious consequences —the (lose having been gradually raised ('Gaz. Med.' Mai 18-i5); while one grain of strychnia is commonly regarded as a fatal dose to a healthy adult. In a case of tetanus, Dupuytren gave as much as two ounces of opium at a dose (GO grammes), without serious consequences. (Flaudin, ' Traite des Poisons,' vol. 1, p. 231.) It has also been remarked that persons aflected with tetanus are not easily salivated by mercury. The morbid state appears to create the power of resisting the ordinary effects of poisons. (' Colles's Lectures,' vol. 1, p. 77.) The effect of certain diseases of the nervous system, as well as of habit, either in retarding the appearance of symptoms or in blunting the operation of a poison, it is not difficult to appreciate; they are cases which can present no practical difficulty to a medical jurist. On the other hand, in certain diseased states of the system, there may be an increased susceptibility of the action of poison. Thus, in those persons who have a disposition to apoplexy, a small dose of opium may act more quickly and prove fatal. In a person labouring under inflammation of the stomach or bowels, there would be an increased susceptibility to the action of arsenic, antimony, or other irritants. In debility from any cause these mineral sub- stances Avould also act injuriously even in ordinary doses. Antimony is a most powerful depressant, and might, by its effect on the heart, cause death by syncope. The influence of disease in increasing the operation of poison, has been noticed in cases of diseased kidney (granular degeneration), in which small doses of mercury have produced severe salivation, leading to exhaustion and death. In diseases of the lungs affecting aged persons, opium in medi- cinal doses, has been observed to exert a poisonous action. The effect of the drug appears to be intensified by the disease. This observation applies equally to niorphia. Chloroform vapour in ordinary quantity has been found to produce fiital effects, in cases in which there was latent disease of the heart or of the coronary arteries of this organ. A fatty condition of the muscular tissue leading to great feebleness of the heart's action, appears to be highly favourable to death by syncope, under the use of chloroform. A knowledge of these facts is of importance in reference to charges of malapraxis when death has arisen from ordinary or extraordinary doses of medicines, adminis- tered to persons labouring imder disease. In such cases, another mode of treatment should be substituted, or a smaller dose than usual given, and its effects carefully Avatched. In some instances, however, full and large doses of powerful drugs have been recklessly given, and when a fatal result has followed, thei-e has been a strong disposition to refer death to the supposed disease, of which, however, sometimes no trace could be found in the bod)'. An experienced physician, well acquainted with pathological anatomy, informs me that since the use of chloroform has become general, and deaths under its use are not unfrequent, a fattiness and flabbiness of the muscular structure of the heart has been sought for and almost universally found ! The fatal result has not been attributed to its real cause, the imprudent or careless adminis- tration of chloroform, but to some minute structural changes revealed by the microscope in the substance of the organ. Sjimptoms appear during a state of health.—SymiptomH of poisoning may manifest themselves in a person while in a state of perfect health, without any apparent cause. This rule is of course open to numerous exceptions, because the person on whose life an attempt has been made, may be actually labouring imder disease; and under these circumstances, the symptoms may be so obscure as often to disarm all suspicion. When poison is exhibited in medicine, a practitioner is very liable to be deceived, especially if the disease under which the person is labouring is of an acute nature, and is attended by symptoms of disorder in the alimentary canal. Several cases of poisoning


[204/1290 b21964944_0204.jp2]

SYMPTOMS OCCUREING AFTEE A MEAL. 140 have occurred in which arsenic was criminally substituted for medicine, and given to the parties while labouring under a disorder of the bowels. _We are, however, justitied in saying, with respect to this character of poisoning, that when in a previously healthy person, violent vomiting and purging occur suddenly and without any assignable cause, such as pregnancy, disease, or in- discretion in diet, to account for them, there is strong reason to suspect that irritant poison has been taken. When the person is already labouring under disease, we must be especially watchful on the occurrence of any sudden change in the character or violence of the symptoms, unless such change can be easily accounted for on common or well-known medical principles. In most cases of criminal poisoning we meet with alarming symptoms without any obvious or sufficient natural causes to explain them. The practitioner will of course be aware that there are certain diseases which are liable to occur suddenly in healthy people, the exact cause of which may not at first sight be apparent; therefore this c;riterion is only one out of many on which a medical opinion shoiild be founded. 2. In poisoning the symjitoms appear soon after a meal., or soon after some land of food or medicine has been taken.—This is by far the most important character of poisoning in the living body. It has been already stated that most poisons begin to operate within about an hour after they have been swallowed; and although there are a few exceptions to this remark, yet they occur under circumstances easily to be appreciated by a practitioner. Thus, then, it follows that, supposing the symptoms under which a person is labouring, to depend on poison, the substance has most probably been sAvallowed, either in food or medicine, hrom half an hoiir to an hour previously. It must be observed, however, that cases may occur in which the poison has not been introduced by the mouth. Oil of vitriol and other corrosive liquids have been thrown up the rectum in injections, and have thus caused death ; the external application of arsenic, corrosive sublimate, and cantharides to ulcerated siu-faces has destroyed life. In one case, arsenic was introduced into the vagina of a female, and she died in five days under all the symptoms of arsenical poisoning. (Schneider, 'Ann. der ges. Staatsarzneikunde,' i. 229.) Siich cases are rare, but, nevertheless, the certainty that they have occurred, where their occurrence could hardly have been anticipated, shows that in a suspicious case a practitioner should not deny the fact of poisoning, merely because it may be proved that the person could not have taken the poison in the xxsual way, by the mouth. Again, persons may be destroyed by the vapours of ether, chloroform, prussic acid, or other powerful volatile poisons, intro- duced into the body through the lungs. Such a mode of suicide, or murder, might disarm suspicion, from the fact of no noxious material being foimd in the stomach. Let us suppose, however, the circiunstances to have been such that these secret means of destruction could not have been resorted to, and that the poison is one of those most commonly selected by a murderer, such as arsenic, tartar emetic, oxalic acid, or corrosive sublimate, then we may expect that this character of poisoning will be made evident to us, and that somethino- must have been swallowed by the patient shortly before the alarming symp- toms appeared. By observations attentively made, it may be in owr power to connect the appearance of the symptoms with the use of a particular article of food, and thus indirectly lead to the detection of a criminal. Supposing that many hours have passed since food or medicine was taken by the patient, without any effect ensuing—it is probable that the symptoms are due to natural causes and not to poison. When symptoms resembling those of poisoning speedily follow the ingestion of food"or medicine, there is, however, reasonable ground for suspicion ; but caution should be observed in drawing


[205/1290 b21964944_0205.jp2]

141 SEVERAL PERSONS SIMULTANEOUSLY ATTACKED. inferences, since the most extraordinary coincidences sometimes present them- selves. In the case of Sir Theodosins Boughton, who was poisoned by his brother-in-law, Donellan, in 1781, the fact of alarming symptoms coming on in two minutes after the deceased had swallowed what Avas supposed to be a simple medicinal draught, was a most important fact in the evidence against the prisoner. There is no doubt that laurel-Avater had been substituted for the medicine by the prisoner, and that this had caused the symptoms which joreceded death. The practice of substituting poisonous mixtures for medi- cinal draughts or powders is by no means unusual, although it might be supposed to indicate a degree of refinement and knowledge not commonly to be found among criminals. Medical practitioners are thus apt to be imposed upon, and the following case, related by a deceased judge, will serve as a caution :—An apothecary prepared a draught, into which another person put poison, intending thereby to destroy the life of the patient for whom the medicine was prescribed. The patient, not liking the taste of the draught, and thinking there was something suspicious about it, sent it back to the apothecary, who, knowing the ingredients of which he had composed it, and wishing to prove to his patient that he had done nothing Avrong, di'ank it himself, and died from the effects. He was thus the unconscious agent of his own death; and although the draught was intended for another, the party who poisoned it, was held guilty of nuirder. This case contains a warning to medical witnesses. It is not unusual, on trials for poisoning, Avhen the poison is conveyed through medicine, to find a medical witness offering to swallow his own draught in a Court of Law, in order to furnish a convincing practical illustration of the innocence of the medicine ! It need hardly be observed that an exhibition of this kind is never required of a medical witness. If any doubt be raised of the innocent properties of a draixght or powder, a chemical analysis of its contents will be far more satisfactory, and attended with no kind of risk to the practitioner. On the other hand, the occurrence of symptoms resembling those produced by poisoning, soon after food or medicine has been taken, may be a pure coincidence. In such a case, poison is always suspected by the vulgar ; and it will be the duty of a medical jurist to guard against the encouragement of such a suspicion, until he has .strong grounds to believe it to be well founded. No public retractation or apology can ever make amends for the injury which may in this way be inflicted on the reputation of another ; for those who hear the accusation may never hear the defence. In all such cases, a practitioner may entertain a suspicion, but, until confirmed by facts, he should avoid expressing it, or giving it publicity. When death is not a consequence, it is difficult to clear up such cases, except by the aid of a chemical analysis; biit this, as we know, is not always applicable. If death ensue, the real cause is usually apparent, and a suspicion of poisoning is thus often removed by an examination of the body. 3. In poisoning, when several partake at the same time of the same food or medicine (mixed with poison) all suffer from similar sj/inptoms.—This character of poisoning cannot always be procured; but it furnishes good evidence of the fact when it exists. Thus, supposing that after a meal made by several persons fi-om the same dish, only one suffers, the suspicion of poisoning is considerably weakened. The poisoned article of food may be detected by observing whether they who suffer under any symptoms of poisoning, have partaken of one particular solid or liquid in common. In a case of accidental poisoning at a dinner-party, a medical man who was present observed that those who suffered had taken port-wine only : the contents of the bottle were examined, and found to be a saturated solution of arsenic in wine. In general, considerable reliance may be placed upon this character, because it is


[206/1290 b21964944_0206.jp2]

DISCOVERY OF POISON IN THE FOOD. 142 improbable that any common cause of disease should suddenly attack with violent sym]:)toms ol" a similar character, many healthy persons at the same time, and Avithin a short period alter having partaken of food together. We must beware of supposing that, when poison is really present, all will be attacked with precisely similar symptoms; because there are many circum- stances which may modify their nature and progress. In geneival that person who has partaken most freely of the poisoned dish will suffer most severely ; but even this does not always follow. There is a Avell-known case, recorded by Bonnet, where, among several persons who partook of a dish poisoned with arsenic, they who had eaten little and did not vomit, speedily died ; while others who had partaken largely of the dish, and had in consequence vomited freely, recovered. It was just now remarked, that there is no disease resembling poisoning which is likely to attack several healthy persons at the same time, and in the same manner. This is undoubtedly true as a general principle, but the folloAving case will show that mistakes may occasionally arise even under these circumstances. It occurred in London, during the prevalence of the malignant cholera in the year 1832. Four of the members of a family, living in a state of great domestic unhappiness, sat down to dinner in apparently good health : some time after the meal, the father, mother, and daughter, were suddenly seized with violent vomiting and purging. The evacuations were tinged with blood, while the })lueness of the skin, observed in cases of malignant cholera, was absent. Two of these persons died. The son, who was known to have borne ill-will against his father and mother, and who suffered no symptoms on this occasion, was accused of having poisoned them. At the inquest, how- ever, it was clearly shown by the medical attendant, that the deceased persons had really died of malignant cholera, and there was no reason to suspect that any poison had been administered to them. In this instance it will be per- ceived that symptoms resembling those of irritant poison, appeared suddenly in several individuals in perfect health, and shortly after a meal. We hereby learn that the utility of any rules for investigating cases of poisoning, depends entirely on the judgment and discretion with which they are applied to particular cases. It is well to bear in mind, in conducting these enquiries, that symptoms resembling those produced by irritant poison, may be sometimes traced to food. Meat, rendered unAvholesome by disease or decay, pork, bacon, sausages, cheese and bread, as well as certain kinds of shell-fish, may give rise to symptoms of poisoning, and even cause death. Such cases may be regarded as poisoning by animal or vegetable irritants. All the characters above described, as indicative of poisoning, may be observed, and the difficulty of forming an opinion is often increased by the fact that some of the persons attacked, may have previously partaken of the same kind of food without inconvenience, 4. The discovery of poison in the food taken, or in the matters vomited. One of the strongest proofs of poisoning in the living subject, is the detection of poison by chemical analysis, or, if of a vegetable nature, by a microscopical examination, either in the food taken by the person labouring under its effects or in the matters vomited, or, after the lapse of a few hours, in the urine. The evidence is of course more satisfactory when the poison is detected in the matters vomited or in the urine, than in the food; because this will show that it has really been taken, and it Avill readily account for the symptoms. If the vomited matters have been thrown aAvay, we must examine the food of which the patient may have partaken. Should the results in both cases be negative, and no trace of poison be found in the urine, it is probable that the symptoms Avere due to disease.


[207/1290 b21964944_0207.jp2]

EVIDENCE OF POISONING IN THE DEAD. 143 In investigating a case of poisoning in a living subject, a medical jurist must remember, that poisoning is sometimes feigned, and at others imputed. It is easy for an artful person to put poison into food, as Avell as to introduce it into the matters vomited or discharged from the bowels, and to accuse another of having administered it. There are few of these accusers Avho go so far as to swallow poison imder such circvimstances, as there is a great dread of poisonous substances among this class of" criminals ; and it will be at once apparent, that it would require a person well versed in toxicology, to feign a series of symptoms which Avould iihpose upon a practitioner at all acciuainted with, the subject. In short, the dithculty reduces itself to this:— What infei-ence can be drawn from a chemical detection of poison in food ? All that a medical man can say is, whether poison is or is not present in a particular article of food: he must leave it to the authorities of the law to develope the alleged attempt at administration. If the poison has been actually administered or taken, then we should expect to find that the person had suffered from the usual symptoms. The absence of these symptoms Avould be a strong fact against the alleged administration. The detection of poison in the matters vomited, affords no decisive proof that it has been swallowed, except under two circumstances:—1. When the accuser has previously laboured luider the usual symptoms of poisoning, in which case there can be no feigning, and the question of imputation is a matter to be established by general evidence. 2. When the matters are actually vomited into a clean vessel in the presence of the medical attendant himself, or of some person on whose testimony perfect reliance can be placed. The detec- tion of absorbed poison in the urine, furnishes a clear proof that poison has been taken, that it has passed into the blood, and has been subsequently eliminated. CHAPTER 10. ON THE EVIDENCE OF POISONING IN THE DEAD BODY TERTOD AT WHICH POISONS PROVE FATAL CHRONIC POISONING APPEARANCES PRODUCED BY THE DIFFERENT CLASSES OF POISONS REDNESS OF THE MUCOUS MEMBRANE MISTAKEN FOR INFLAMMATION ULCERATION AND CORROSION SOFTENING PERFORATION OF THE STOMACH FROM POISON AND DISEASE. Supposing that the person is dead, and Ave are required to determine whether the case is one of poisoning or not, we must, in the first instance, endeavour to ascertain all the particulars which have been considered in the last chapter, as indicative of poisoning in the living subject. Shoidd the deceased have died from poison, the circumstances of the attack, and the symptoms pre- ceding death, ought to correspond with the characters already described; and in these investigations, it is well to bear in mind the following rule :—There is no one symptom or pathological condition which is peculiar to poisoning ; but at the same time there is probably no disease which presents all those characters which are met with in a special case of poisoning. The additional evidence to be derived from the death of a person, may be considered under the following heads :— 1. The time at ivhich death takes place after the first occurrence of symptoms. This question requires examination, because the more commoii poisons, when taken in fatal dos(is, generally cause death within definite periods of time. By an attention to this point, we may, in some instances, be enabled to negative a charge of poisoning, and in others to form an opinion of the kind of poison which has been taken. In a Court of Law a medical practitioner is often required to state the usual period of time within which


[208/1290 b21964944_0208.jp2]

PERIOD AT WHICH DEATH TAKES PLACE. 144 poisons prove flital. It is to be observed that, not only do poisons differ from each other in this respect, but the same substance, according to the form_ or quantity in which it has been taken, may differ in the rapidity of its action. A large dose of prussic acid, i. e. from half an ounce to an ounce, may destroy life in less than two minutes. In ordinary cases of poisoning by this sub- stance a person dies, i. e. all signs of life have commonly ceased, in from ten to twenty minutes : if he survives half an hour, there is some hope of recovery. In the cases of seven epileptics, accidentally poisoned by a similar dose of this acid in one of the Parisian hospitals, the first died in about twenty minutes, the seventh survived three-quarters of an hour. Oxalic acid, one of the most energetic of the common poisons, when taken in a dose of from half an ounce to an ounce, may destroy life in from ten minutes to an hour : if the poison is not perfectly dissolved when swallowed, it is a longer time in proving fatal. The strong mineral acids, in poisonous doses, destroy life in about eighteen or twenty-four hours. Arsenic, under the form of arsenious acid (white arsenic), operates fatally in from eighteen hours to three or four days. It has, however, in more than one instance, killed a person in two hours. Opium, either as a solid or under the form of laudanum, commonly proves fatal in from six to twelve hours ; but it has been known, in several instances, to destroy life in less than three hours: they who survive the effects of this poison for twelve hours, are considered to have a fair chance of recoveiy. This must be understood to be merely a statement of the average results, as nearly as we are warranted in giving an opinion ; but the medical jiu-ist will of course be aware that the fatal period may be protracted or shortened, ac- cording to all those circumstances which have been elsewhere stated to affect the action of poisons. There are various forms which this question may assume. It may be said that the death of a person, alleged to have taken poison, has occurred too rapidly or too slowly to justify a suspicion of poisoning. The following case will serve as an illustration : A Avoman of the name of Bussell was tried and convicted at the Lewes Summer Assizes, in 1826, for the murder of her husband, by poisoning him with arsenic. The poison was detected in the stomach ; but the fact of poisoning was disputed by some medical Avit- nesses, for this among other reasons, that the deceased had died three hours after the only meal at which the poison could have been administered to him. The authority of Sir A. Cooper and others Avas cited to shoAv that, according to their experience, they had never known a case of poisoning by arsenic to have proved fatal in less than seven hours. This may be admitted, but, at the same time, there Avas sufficient authority on the other side to establish that some cases had actually proved fatal in three or foiu- hours. So far as tliis objection Avas concerned, the prisoner was properly convicted. In reference to the medical question raised at this trial, I may observe that tAvo distinct cases have occurred in Avhich the individuals died certainly within two hours after taking arsenic ; and several instances have been reported, in Avhich death has taken place in from three to four hours after the administration of this poison. It seems extraordinary in the present day, that any attempt should have been made by a professional man to negative a charge of crimmal poison- ing upon so weak a ground as this; but this opinion Avas expressed many years ago, when the facts connected Avith poisoning Avere but little knoAvn. It is quite obvious that there is nothing, so far as we knoAV, to prevent arsenic fi-om destroying life in an hour, or even Avithin a shorter period. A case Avill be hereafter related, in which death took place from arsenic probably Avithin tAventy minutes. These matters can be settled only by a careful observation of numerous cases, and not by any a priori reasoning, or by a limited individual experience.


[209/1290 b21964944_0209.jp2]

SUDDEN DEATH. CHRONIC POISONING. 145 In all instances of sudden death there is generally a strong tendency on the part of the public to suspect poisoning. They never can be brought to consider that persons may die a natural death suddenly, as well as slowly; or, as we shall presently see, that death may really take place slowly, and yet be due to poison. This prejudice continually gives rise to the most unfounded suspicions of poisoning, and, at the same time, leads to cases of chronic or slow poisoning being fi-equently mistaken for natural disease. One of the means recommended for distinguishing nai-cotic poisoning from apoplexy or disease of the heart, is the diiFerence in the rapidity with which death takes place. Thus, apoplexy or disease of the heart may prove fatal either instantly or within an hour. The only poisons likely to operate with such fatal rapidity, are prussic acid or nicotina. Poisoning by opium is commonly protracted for five or six hours. This poison has never been known to destroy life instantaneously, or within a few minutes. Thus, then, it may happen that death will occur with such rapidity as to render it impossible, under the circumstances, to attribute it to narcotic poison. Chronic poisoning.—When a poison destroys life rapidly, it is called a case of acute poisoning, to distinguish it from the chronic form, i. e. in which death takes place slowly. Chronic poisoning is a subject which has of late frequently required medico-legal investigation. Most poisons, when their effects are not rapidly manifested, owing either to the smallness of the dose or to timely treatment, are capable of slowly undermining the powers of life, and killing the patient by producing emaciation and exhaustion. This is sometimes observed in the action of arsenic, corrosive sublimate, and tar- tarized antimony, but it has been remarked also in cases of poisoning by the mineral acids and caustic alkalies. Death is here an indirect consequence; —in poisoning by the acids or alkalies, either stricture of the gullet is induced, or the lining membrane of the stomach is destroyed, and the process of digestion impaired, a condition which leads to exhaustion and death. The time at which these indirect effects may prove fatal, is of course liable to vary. A person has been known to die from a stricture of the gullet, brought on by sulphuric acid, eleven months after the poison Avas swallowed ; and there is no reason to doubt that instances may occiu' of a still more protracted nature. In cases of chronic poisoning there is sometimes great difficulty in assigning death exclusively to the original action of the poison, since the habits of life of the person, a tendency to disease, and other circumstances, may have concurred either to accelerate or produce a fatal result. To connect a stricture of the gullet proving fatal, with the effects of poisoning by a mineral acid, it would be necessary to show that there was no tendency to this disease before the acid was administered: that the symptoms appeared soon after the first effects of the poison went off: that these symptoms continued to become aggravated until the time of death, and lastly that there Avas no other cause to which death could with any probability be referred. These remarks apply equally to the secondary fatal effects of any poison, such, for instance, as the salivation occasionally induced by corrosive sublimate, and the exhaustion and depression w^iich are caused by tartarized antimony, when the acute .symptoms of poisoning by these substances have passed away. Several cases have come before our tribunals, in which the facts connected ■with this form of poisoning were of some importance. I allude to those of Miss Blandy, tried at Oxford, in 1752, for the murder of her father by arsenic; and of a woman named Butterjield, tried at Croydon, in 1775, for the murder of a Mr. Scawen, by administering corrosive sublimate. Among cases of recent occurrence, may be mentioned that of Mrs. Wooler {Reg. v. Wooler, Durham Winter Assizes, 1855), in which it was clearly proved L


[210/1290 b21964944_0210.jp2]

14G SLOW OR CHRONIC POISONING. that the deceased had been under tlie influence of arsenic, administered at intervals in repeated doses, for a period of about seven weeks before her death. She died from exhaustion and the secondary effects of the poison. In three other cases tartarized antimony was the poison selected. It was given in repeated doses, over different periods, and caused death, by the specific effects of poisoning in a chronic form. 1. The case of Ann Palmer. (' Guy's Hospital Reports,' October 1857.) 2. The case of M'Mullen (Liver- pool Summer Assizes, 1856), in which a woman was tried and convicted for causing the death of her husband; and 3rd, the case of Reg. v. Hardman (Lancaster Summer Assizes, 1857), in which a man was convicted of the murder of his Avife. In most cases, murderers destroy life by administering poison in large doses; but in the instances referred to, small doses were given at intervals, a fact which, in some of them, led to a medical doubt of the real cause of the symptoms. The case of Isabella Banks {Reg. V. Smethurst, Central Criminal Court, August, 1859) gave rise to a conflict of medical opinion respecting the cause of death. Drs. Julius and Bird, who attended the deceased throughout her illness of about a month's duration, the late Dr. Todd, and myself, referred the symptoms and cause of death to chronic poisoning by antimony and arsenic, and in confirmation of this opinion, antimony was distinctly found by Dr. Odling and myself in the intestines after death. Arsenic was also found in an evacuation passed by the deceased three days before her death. Dr. Tyler Smith, Dr. Richardson, and others, who did not see the deceased, ignoring the existence of antimony in the body, referred the symptoms and appear- ances partly to pregnancy, and partly to a sudden attack of severe dysentery. The jiu-y found the accused guilty, but upon the medical doubt thus raised in the public mind respecting the cause of death, the accused was subsequently discharged. A similar question arose in Reg. v.Winslow. (Liverpool Autumn Assizes, 1860.) The prisoner was charged with the murder of a Mrs. James by administering to her small doses of antimony. The suspicions of Dr. Cameron, who attended deceased, were excited by the intermittent and violent nature of the vomiting, as well as by the extreme depression. Antimony was found in the urine and fasces by Dr. Edwards; and, after death, this substance was discovered, in small quantity, in the viscera, by Dr. Edwards, Dr. Miller, and myself. The deceased Avas at the time labouring under malignant disease of the ccecum, but it was alleged that the antimony had accelerated her death. The jury acquitted the accused. The examination of the bodies of the sister of deceased, as well as of two other members of the family, led to the discovery of antimony also in small quantity, in the viscera of each; and fi-om the nature of the symptoms preceding death, as well as the general healthiness of the organs, no doubt was entertained by the medical Avitnesses that all these persons, members of the same household, had died from the effects of antimony administered at intervals in small doses. The law could not fix the perpetration of these four murders upon any person, and three would have Avholly escaped public notice„but for the death of Mrs. James some months after the bodies of the others had been buried under medical certificates setting forth natural causes of death! The occurrence of such cases as these, of which no fewer than sixteen have been referred to me for examination since 1847, suggests grave reflections on the insecurity of life, when poison is used with skill and cunning, and demonstrates the inefficiency of the present system of regis- tering causes of death. The editor of the Law Magazine has said,* in commenting upon the Smethurst case, 'All that is requisite for future murderers by poison to do, is to use small doses, combine the use of various destructive drugs, and subpoena the proper medical witnesses for the defence' (' Law Magazine, Nov. 1859, p. 145.)


[211/1290 b21964944_0211.jp2]

147 SLOW OR CHRONIC POISONING. These cases show that medical men, in signing certificates, do not sufficiently inquire into the nature of the fatal illness, or the cause of death : but this is an evil which admits of an easy remedy. The public have much more to dread in the fact that, even in plain cases of poisoning, some physicians of experience and repute have been unable to discriminate the symptoms from those of natural disease. Thus, in the notorious case of William Palmer^ one physician who appeared for the defence, affirmed that the symptoms under which Cook died were those of angina pectoris; while another physician, also employed for the defence, assigned death to epilepsy with tetanic complica- tions ! The witnesses came forward as experts to maintain these views, and to induce the Court and jury, as well as the public, to adopt one or the other. In reference to the death of Ann Palmer, which was caused by doses of antimony, the solid sulphide of this metal was found in the stomach after death, while the metal itself pervaded the whole of the tissues, a respectable physician, with only a superficial knowledge of the real facts of the case, wrote a pamphlet to prove that she had died from an attack of common cholera ! If these gentlemen had been called in to attend these two victims of secret poisoning while living, it is quite obvious that they would have had no suspicion of poisoning, and that they would have respectively certified that death was caused in the one case by angina pectoris or epilepsy, and in the other by cholera. They would thus have elFectually screened, xmder erroneous medical certificates, the acts of a man who is now universally admitted to have been the greatest criminal of the age. If physicians of some standing and professed experts, can thus overlook ordinary cases of poisoning, it is not surprising that general medical practitioners, who have not given special attention to the subject of toxicology, should fall into the error of granting erroneous medical certificates, and of certifying that death from arsenic or opium was due to cholera, convulsions, or apoplexy ! The characters of chronic poisoning have of late years acquired a special interest for the medical jurist. There is a difficulty about them which no accuracy of observation or judgment can sm-mount. The poison or poisons, if found in the dead body at all, must necessarily exist in fractional parts of a grain. This alone will be sufficient to create a doubt whether death has been caused by the poison, although it is quite consistent with medical ex- perience that a person may die from chronic poisoning, and little or none of the poison be found in the body after death. In the case of Mrs. James {Reg. V. Winslow), not more than the tenth part of a gi-ain was found in the whole of the tissues of the body : in the case of Isabella Banks {Reg. v. Smethnrst), the quantity was greater than this, but less than a grain altogether ; while in the case of Mrs. Peters, of Yeovil, examined by Mr, Herapath, none was found in the body, although this chemist had extracted a quantity of antimony as sulphide from the urine of deceased, in less than nine days beibre death ! In this case Dr. Garland had also found antimony in the evacuations during life, and had referred the intermittent irritation of the stomach and bowels, from which deceased had suffered, to the secret use of this mineral. The jury returned a verdict that deceased had died from disease, and that death was accelerated by some irritant. ('Lancet,' August 4th, 1860, p, 119.) On some recent trials for poisoning {Reg. v. William Palmer, C. C. C. 1856), it has been a contested scientific question, whether a person pan die from poison and no trace of the poison remain in the body. Mr. Herapath's evidence in Mrs. Peters' case not only now proves the affirmative, but goes to show that antimony may act fatally and be entirely eliminated from the system in about a week, f Med. Times and Gaz.' Aug. 25, Sept. 15, and 29, 1860, pp. 190,271, 817.) 2. Evidence from Appearances in the Body —One of the chief means ol determining whether a person has died from poison, is an examination of the 1.2


[212/1290 b21964944_0212.jp2]

148 EVIDENCE FROM APrEARAXCES IN THE BODY. body after death. In relation to external appearances, there are none indica- tive of poisoning upon Avhich we can safely rely. It was formerly supposed that the bodies of persons who Avere poisoned, putrefied more rapidly than those of others who had died from natural disease; and evidence for or against poisoning was at one time derived from the external appearance of the body. This is now known to be an error: the bodies of persons poisoned are not more rapidly decomposed, ccpteris paribus, than those of others who have died a sudden and violent death from any cause whatever. (See p. 57.) Irritant poisons act chiefly upon the stomach and intestines, which they irritate, inflame, and corrode. We may likewise meet with all the conse- quences of inflammation, such as softening, thickening, ulceration, perforation, or gangrene. Sometimes the coats of the viscera are thickened, at other times thinned and softened, by the action of an irritant. Neurotic (Cerebral and Spinal) poisons do not commonly leave any well- marked appearances in the body. The stomach and intestines present no unnatural changes. There may be greater or less fulness of the vessels of the brain and spinal marrow, as well as of their membranes ; but even this is often so slight as to escape notice, unless attention be particularly directed to these organs. Elfusion of blood is rarely found. The Narcotico-irritant or Cerebrospinal poisons may affect either the brain or the stomach and bowels, and commonly all these parts according to their peculiar mode of action. It is important to bear in mind, that both Irritants and Neurotics may destroy life Avithout leaAdng any appreciable changes in the body. To such cases as these, the remarks about to be made do not apply. The proofs of poisoning must, in such exceptional cases, be procured entirely from other sources. Any cA'idence derivable from the appearances in the body of a person poisoned, Avill be imperfect unless we are able to distinguish them from those analogous changes often met Avith as the results of ordinary disease. These are confined to the mucous membrane of the stomach and boAvels. They are redness, ulceration, softening, and perforation. Each of these conditions may depend upon disease, as Avell as upon the action of irritant poisons. Redness.—It is a main character of the irritants to produce, as a result of inflammation, redness of the mucous or lining membrane of the stomach and small intestines. This redness, Avhen first seen, is usually of a deep crimson colour, becoming brighter by exposure to air. It may be diflTused over the whole mucous membrane : at other times it is seen in patches, dots, or lines (striaj), spread irregularly over the surface of the stomach. It is sometimes met Avith at the smaller, but more commonly at the larger end of this organ, and again Ave occasionally find the folds or prominences only of the mucous mem- brane presenting this red or inflamed appearance. Redness of the mucous membrane may, hoAvever, be due to gastritis or gastro-enteritis as a result of disease; and in order to assign the true cause of the inflammation, it Avill be necessary to have an account of the symptoms preceding death, or some chemical proof of the existence of irritant poison in the contents of the stomach or in the tissues of the body. In the healthy state, the mucous membrane of the stomach is pale and white, or nearly so, except during digestion, Avhen it is slightly reddened; and some observers have remarked that a slight redness has often remained in the stomachs of those who have died during the performance of the dio-estive process. When in contact Avith the spleen or liver, after death, the stomach is apt to acquire a deep livid colour from the transudation of blood; and it is well knoAvn that the bowels acquire a someAvliat similar colour from the gravitation of blood Avhich always takes place after death. ISTone of tliese appearances are likely to be mistaken for the action of an irritant poison.


[213/1290 b21964944_0213.jp2]

EEDNESS AND ULCERATION OF THE STOMACH. 149 There is an important class of cases in which redness of the miicous membrane of the stomach is found after death, not dei^endent on the action of poison or on any easily assignable cause. These cases, owing to their being so little known, and involved in much obscurity, deserve the attention of a medical jurist, since the appearances closely resemble those produced by in*itant poison. A person may die Avithout suffering from any symptoms of disordered stomach; but on an inspection of the body, a general redness of the mucous membrane of this organ will be found, not distinguishable from the redness which is so commonly seen in arsenical poisoning. Several cases of this kind have occurred at Guy's Hospital: and drawings which have been made of the appearance presented by the stomach, are preserved in the Museum collection. The redness of the lining membrane of the stomach, in cases of poisoning, is so speedily altered by pvitrefaction, when circumstances are favourable to this process, as frequently to render it impossible for a witness to speak with any certainty upon its cause. Putrefactive infiltration from the blood con- tained in the adjacent viscera and muscles, will give a reddish-coloured appearance to a stomach otherwise in a healthy condition (p. 52). Great dispute has arisen respecting the length of time during which redness of the stomach produced by an irritant will be recognizable and easily distinguishable from putrefactive changes. It is sufficient to say, that no certain rule can be laid down on the subject : it must be left to the knowledge and discretion of the Avitness. I have distinctly seen the Avell-marked appearances of inflamma- ation produced by arsenic in the stomach and duodenum in an exhumed body tAventy-eight days after interment [^Reg. v. Jennings, Berks Lent Ass. 1845); and in another instance, referred to me by Mr. Lewis, the coroner for Essex, in August 1846, the reddened state of the mucous membrane, in a case of arsenical poisoning, Avas 2:)lainly perceptible on removing a layer of arsenic, nineteen months after interment. (See, on this question, a case of sus- pected poisoning by Orfila, 'Annales d'Hyg.' 1839, vol. 1, p. 127.) If, hoAv- ever, there should be a reasonable doubt respecting the cause ol" redness, and no poison is detected, it Avould be unsafe to rely upon this appearance as evidence of poisoning. Ulceration.—In irritant poisoning, the stomach is occasionally found ul- cerated : but this is, comparatively .speaking, a rare occurrence. In such cases the mucous membrane is removed in small distinct circular patches, under the edges of Avhich the poison (arsenic) may be found. Ulceration of the stomach is a more common result of disease, than of the action of poison. As a con- sequence of disease, it is very insidious, going on often for Aveeks together, without giving any indications of its existence, except perhaps slight gastric disturbance Avith occasional nausea, vomiting, and loss of appetite. In this case, the ulceration is commonly seen in small circumscribed patches. It is worthy of remark, as a means of distinction, that ulceration has never been known to take place from arsenic or any irritant poison, until symptoms indicative of irritant poisoning have occurred. In ulceration from disease, the mucous membrane is commonly only reddened in the neighbourhood of the ulcer. In ulceration from poison, the redness is generally diffused over other parts of the stomach, as Avell as over the duodenum and small intestines. A case, hoAvever, occurred in Guy's Hospital, some years ago, in Avhich, Avith a small circular patch of ulceration near the cardiac opening, the Avhole mucous membrane Avas red and injected; but this singular condition of the stomach, so closely resembling the effects of an irritant poison, Avas unaccompanied by any marked symptoms of irritation during life. The history of a case pre- vious to death Avill thus commonly enable us to determine to what cause the ulceration found, may be due. Care must be taken to distinguish ulceration


[214/1290 b21964944_0214.jp2]

150 APPEARANCES IN THE STOMACH from corrosion. Ulceration is a vital process : the siibstance of a part is re- moved by the absorbents as a simple result of inflammation. Corrosion, on the other hand, is a chemical action;—the parts are removed by the imme- diate contact of the poison : they are decomposed : their vitality is destroyed, and they combine with the corrosive matter itself. Ulceration requires time , for its establishment, while corrosion is either an instantaneous or a very rapid effect. Softening —The coats of the stomach are not unfrequently found so soft as to yield and break do^vn under very slight pressure; and this may be the result either of poisoning, of some spontaneous morbid change in its structure during life, or of the solvent action of the gastric juice after death. As this condition of the stomach, when caused by poison, is produced by those sub- stances only which possess corrosive properties, it follows that in such cases, traces of their action will be perceived in the mouth, throat, and gullet. In softening from disease, the change Avill be confined to the stomach alone, and it is commonly found only at the cardiac or greater end of the o7-gan. When softening is really caused by an irritant poison, it is generally attended by other striking and unambiguous marks of its operation. Softening is not to be regarded as a common character of poisoning : it is only an occasional appear- ance. I have met with an instance in which the coats of the stomach were con- siderably hardened by sulphuric acid. Softening can never be inferred to have proceeded from poison, unless other well-marked changes are present, or unless the poison is discovered in the softened parts. The stomachs of infants have been frequently found softened from natural causes : such cases could not be mistaken for poisoning, since the history of them during life, the want of other* appearances indicative of poisoning, and the total absence of poison from the viscera, would prevent such a suspicion from being entertained. Perforation.—The stomach may become perforated, either as a result of poisoning or disease. Perforation from Poisoning.—This may arise —1, from coiTosion ; 2, from ulceration. The perforation by corrosion is by far the most common variety of perforation from poisoning. It is occasionally witnessed when tte strong mineral acids have been taken, especially sulphuric acid :—the stomach, in such cases, is blackened and extensively destroyed, the aperture is large, the edges are rough and irregular, and the coats are easily lacerated. The acid escapes into the abdomen, and may be readily detected there by chemical analysis. The perforation from ulceration^ caused by irritant poison (arsenic), is but little known. There are but few instances on record. In a great number of poisoned subjects examined during many years past at Guy's Hospital, not a single case has occurred. It must, then, be looked upon as a rare appearance in cases of irritant poisoning. Perforation from Disease.—This is by no means an \musual condition. Many cases of this disease will be foiind reported elsewhere. (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.' No. 8.) It is invariably fatal when it proceeds so far that the contents of the stomach escape into the abdomen; but sometimes the stomach becomes glued to the pancreas or other organs during the ulcerative process, and then the per- son may recover. Several instances of this kind of adliesion have been met Avith in inspections. The symptoms from perforation commonly attack a person suddenly, wliile apparently enjoying perfect health. Hence these cases may be easily mistaken for those of irritant poisoning. The principal facts ob- served with regard to this formidable disease are the following : 1. It often attacks young females from eighteen to twenty-three years of age. 2. The preceding illness is extremely slight; sometimes there is merely loss of appetite, or a capricious appetite with uneasiness after eating. 3. The attack commences with a sudden and most severe pain in the abdonien, generally


[215/1290 b21964944_0215.jp2]

PROM DISEASE AND IRRITANT POISON. 151 soon after a meal. In irritant poisoning the pain usually comes on gradually, and slowly increases in severity. 4. Vomiting, if it exist at all, is commonly slight, and is chiefly confined to what is swallowed. There is no purging: the bowels are generally constipated. In irritant poisoning the vomiting is usually severe, and piu-ging seldom absent. 5. The person dies commonly in from eighteen to thirty-six hours: that is also the average period of death in the most common form of irritant poisoning, i.e. by arsenic ; but in no case yet recorded has arsenic caused perforation of the stomach within twenty-four hours; and it appears probable that a considerable time must elapse before such an effect could be produced by this or any irritant. 6. In perforation from disease, the symptoms and death are clearly referable to peritonitis. 7. In the perforation from disease, the aperture is commonly of an oval or rounded form, about half an inch in diameter, situated in or near the lesser curvature of the stomach, and the edges are smooth. The outer margin of the aperture is often blackened, and the aperture itself is funnel-shaped from Avithin outwards, i.e. the mucous coat is the most removed, and the outer or peritoneal coat, the least. The coats of the stomach, round the edge of the aperture, are usually thickened for some (fistance; and when cut they have almost a cartilaginous hardness. These characters of the aperture will not alone indicate whether it is the result of poisoning or disease; but the absence of poison from the stomach, with the want of other characteristic marks of irritant poisoning, would enable us to say that disease was the cause. Besides, the history of the case during life would materially assist us in our judgment. The great risk in all these cases is, that the effects of disease may be mistaken for those of poisoning; for we are not likely to mistake a perforation caused by irritant poison for the result of disease. Notwithstanding the well-marked differences above described, it is common to meet with cases of imputed poisoning where death has really occurred from peritonitis following perfora- tion. I have been required to examine several cases of this kind: one of them will be found elsewhere recorded. (' Guy's Hosp. Eeports,' Oct. 1850, page 226.) In another the body was exhumed after several months' burial, and the stomach was found perforated from disease in the usual situation. Spontaneous or Gelatinized Perforation.—The stomach is occasionally subject to a spontaneous change, by which its coats are softened, and give way generally at the cardiac or greater end. As the effusion of the contents of the organ in such a case never gives rise to peritoneal inflammation, and no symptoms occur prior to death to indicate the existence of so extensive a destruction of parts, it is presumed to be a change in the dead body, and the coats of the stomach are supposed to undergo a process of solution or diges- tion. It is commonly attributed to the solvent action of the gastric juice, the spleen, diaphragm, and other viscera being sometimes softened. My colleague. Dr. Wilks, who has for many years conducted the inspections at Guy's Hospital, informs me that this post-mortem or cadaveric perforation of the stomach is so rare a condition, that it is not met with once in five hundred cases. In the last two cases in which it was observed, one patient had died from albuminuria and the other from head-affection; but in neither of these could there be found any peculiarities regarding their food, the time of the last meal, or the state of the bodies to account for the spontaneous destruction of the coats of the stomach. (For remarks on this subject by Dr. Budd, see 'Med. Gaz.' vol. 39, p. 895.) In January 1845, I met with an instance of this perforation in a child between two and three years of age. It was seized with convulsions, became insensible, and died twenty-three hours afterwards. After death, the greater end of the stomach was found destroyed to the extent of three inches; and the edges were softened and blackened. There was no food in the stomach, and nothing had passed into


[216/1290 b21964944_0216.jp2]

RULES FOR INVESTIGATING 152 the organ for thirty-two hours before death ! It was therefore impossible to ascribe death to the perforation, or the perforation to poison. (For a full account of this case, see ' Med. Gaz.' vol. 30, p. 32.) An inspection of the body, with a general history of the case, will commonly suffice to remove any doubt in forming an opinion whether the extensive destruction so commonly met with, has or has not arisen from poison. Thus, in a cadaveric perforation, the aperture is generally situated in that part of the stomach which lies to the left of the cardia; it is very large, of an irregular form, and ragged and pulpy at the edges, which have the appearance of being scraped. The mucous membrane of the stomach is not found inflamed. There is occasionally slight redness, with dark brown or almost black lines (stria;) in and near the dis- solved coats, which have an acid reaction. It can only be confounded with perforation by the action of corrosives ; but the well-marked symptoms during life, and the detection of the poison after death, together Avith the changes in the throat and gullet, will at once indicate the perforation produced by corro- sive poison. A case of extensive perforation of the stoiuach, as the result of the action of the gastric fluids, has been reported by Dr. Barnes. (See ' Med. Gaz.' vol. 41, p. 293.) CHAPTER 11. RULES TO BE OBSERVED IN INVESTIGATING A CASE OF POISONING THE INSPECTION OF THE BODY THE EXHUMATION OF BODIES—IDENTITY OF SUBSTANCES—PRESER- VATION OF ARTICLES FOR ANALYSIS—USE OF NOTES—MEDICO-LEGAL REPORTS. When a practitioner is called to a case of poisoning, it is necessaiy that he should know to what points he ought to give his attention. It is very proper that every effort should be made by him to save life when the individual is living: but while engaged in one duty, it is also in his poAver to perform another, supposing the case to be one of suspected criminal poisoning, namely, to note down many circumstances which may tend to detect the per- petrator of a crime. There is no person so Avell fitted to observe these points as a medical man; but it unfortunately happens, that many facts important as evidence are often overlooked. The necessity for observing and recording them is not perhaps generally known. A medical man need not make himself officious on such occasions, but he would be unmindful of his duty as a member of society, if he did not aid the course of justice by extending his scientific knowledge to the detection of crime. It is much to the credit of the medical profession, that the crime of murder by poisoning, a form of death from which no caution or foresight can protect an individual, is so frequently brought to light, by the announcement of suspicious facts of a medical nature to magistrates and coroners ; and on several occasions the higliest compliments have been passed by judges on medical practitioners Avho have been thus indirectly the means of bringing atrocious criminals to the bar of justice. The following appear to me to be the principal points which demand tlu' attention of a medical jurist in all cases of suspected poisoning: 1. With respect to Symptoms. 1. The time of their occurrence,—their nature. 2. The exact period at which they were observed to take place after a meal, or after food or medicine had been taken. 3. The order of their occurrence. 4. Whether there was any remission or intermission in their progress, or, Avhether they continued to become more and more aggravated iintil death. 5. Whether the patient had laboured under any previous illness. 6. Whether the symptoms Avere observed to recur more violently after a particular meal, or after any particular kind of


[217/1290 b21964944_0217.jp2]

ALLEGED CASES OF TOISONING. food or medicine. 7. Whether the patient has vomited :—the vomited matters, if any (especially those first ejected), should be procured : their odour, colour, and acid or alkaline reaction noted, as well as their quantity. 8. If none be procurable, and the vomiting has taken place on the dress, furniture, or floor of a room,—then a portion of the clothing, sheet, or carpet, may be cut out and reserved for analysis;—if the vomiting has occurred on a deal floor, a portion of the wood may be scraped or cut out:—or if on a stone pavement, then a clean piece of sponge soaked in distilled water may be used to remove any traces of the substance. [Some years since, an animal was poisoned by arsenic. None of the poison could be detected in the stomach, but it was easily found in a portion of deal floor, rendered humid by the liquid matters which the animal had vomited during the night.] The vessel in which vomited matters have been contained will often furnish valuable evidence, since heavy mineral poisons fall to the bottom, or adhere to the sides. 9. Endeavour to ascertain the probable nature of the food or medicine last taken, and the exact time at which it was taken. 10. Ascertain the nature of all the different articles of food used at a meal. 11. Any sus- pected articles of food, as well as the vomited matters, should be sealed up as soon as possible in a clean glass vessel, labelled, and reserved for analysis. 12. Note down, in their own words, all explanations voluntarily made by parties present, or who are supposed to be concerned in the suspected poisoning. 13. Whether more than one person partook of the food or medicine:—if so, Avhether all these persons were affected, and how? 14. Whether the same kind of food or medicine had been taken before by the patient or other persons without ill effects following. In the event of the death of the patient, it Avill be necessary for the practitioner to note down—15. The exact time of death, if known, and thvis determine how long a period the person has survived after having been first attacked with the suspicious symptoms. 16. Observe the attitude and position of the body. 17. Observe the state of the dress. 18. Observe all surrounding objects. Any bottles, paper-packets, weapons, or spilled liquids lying about should be collected and preserved. 19. Collect any vomited matters near the deceased. Observe whether vomiting has taken place in the recumbent position or not. If the person has vomited in the erect or sitting postiire, the front of the dress Avill commonly be found covered with the vomited matters. Inspection of the Body. 20. Note the external appearance of the body, whether the surface is livid or pallid. 21. Note the state of the countenance. 22. Note all marks of violence on the person, or discomposure of the dress, marks of blood, &c. 23. Observe the presence or absence of warmth or coldness in the legs, arms, abdomen, mouth, or armpits. 24. The presence of rigidity or cadaveric spasm in the body. To give any value to the two last-mentioned characters, it is necessary for the practitioner to observe the nature of the floor on which the body is lying,—whether the body be clothed or naked, young or old, fat or emaciated. These conditions create a difference, in respect to the cooling of the body and the access of rigidity (pp. 5 and 11). 25. If found dead—When was the deceased last seen living, or known to have been alive? 26. Note all circumstances leading to a suspicion of suicide or murder. 27. The time after death at which the inspection is made. _ 28. Observe^ the state of the abdominal viscera. If the stomach and intestines are found inflamed, the seat of inflammation should be exactly specified ; also all marks of softening, ulceration, effusion of blood, corrosion, or perforation. The stomach should be removed and placed in a separate vessel, ligatures being applied to the two ends. If cut open for examination at this period, this should be performed in


[218/1290 b21964944_0218.jp2]

RULES FOR IXSPECTIONS IN POISONING; 154 a clean dish, and with such care that none of the contents are lost or are allowed to mix with the contents of the intestines. 29. The contents of the stomach, if this organ is opened during the inspection, should be collected in a clean graduated vessel:—notice a, the quantity ; the odour tried by several persons; c, the colour; J, acid or alkaline reaction; e, presence of blood, mucus, or bile ; /, presence of undigested food ; and here it may be as well to observe, that the presence of farinaceous matters (bread) would be indicated by the addition of iodine water, if the contents were not alkaline—of fat, by heat; g, other special characters. 30. The contents of the duodenum should be separately collected, ligatures being applied to it. 31. Observe the state of the large intestines, especially the rectum, and note the condition of their contents. The discovery of hardened fgeces in the rectum would prove that purging had not existed recently before death. In one case which I was required to examine, this became a question of considerable importance. 32. The state of the windpipe, throat, and gullet, whether there are in these parts any foreign substances, or marks of inflammation and corrosion. This is of essential importance, as it throws a light upon the question, whether the poison swallowed was irritant or corrosive, and whether it had or had not a local chemical action. It also removes any doubt which might arise respect- ing death by suffocation from mechanical causes. 33. The state of the lungs and heart; all morbid changes noted. 34. The state of the brain and spinal marrow. 35. The condition of the uterus, ovaries, and genital organs should be examined, as, in the female, poison has been sometimes introduced into the system by the vagina. 3G. The liver with the gall bladder should be removed for a chemical examination. 37. The urinary bladder, with any fluid con- tained in it, should be removed and placed in a separate jar. Such are the points to which, in the greater number of cases of suspected poisoning, a medical jurist should attend. By means of these data, noted according to the particular case to which they are adapted, he will in general be enabled, without difficulty, to determine the probable time of death, and the actual means by which death was brought about. He may thereby have it in his power also to point out the dish or article of food which had con- tained the poison, if the case be one of poisoning ; and to throw light upon any disputed question of suicide or murder in relation to the deceased. Many cases of poisoning are rendered obscure, owing to these points not having been attended to in the first instance. I have not considered it necessary to enter into any details respecting the mode of perfoi-ming an inspection. This the practitioner will have acquired during his study of anatomy : and the only essential points in addition to those mentioned are, 1. To examine all the important organs for marks of natural disease: and 2. To note down any unusual pathological appearances, or ab- normal deviations; although they may at the time appear to have no bearing on the question of poisoning. It is useful to bear in mind on these occasions, that the body is inspected, not merely to show that the individual has died from poison, but to prove that he has not died from any natural cause. Medical practitioners commonly give their attention exclusively to the first point; Avhile lawyers, who defend accused parties, very properly direct a most searching examination to the last-mentioned point, i. e. the healthy or un- healthy state of those organs Avhich are essential to life, and with which the poison has not probably come in contact. The usual causes of sudden death have their seats commonly in the brain, the heart and its great vessels, or in the lungs. Marks of effusion of blood, congestion, inflammation, suppuration, or a diseased condition of the valves of the heart, should be sought for and accurately noted, whatever may be the condition of the abdominal viscera. It has also been recommended that an examination of the spinal maiTow should be


[219/1290 b21964944_0219.jp2]

liNSPECTlON OF EXHUMED BODIES. 155 made. If the cause of death be obscure after the general examination of the body, there is good reason for inspecting the condition of this organ. Exhumation of Bodies.—Sometimes the inspection of a body is required to be made long after interment. So long as the coffin remains entire, there may be the expectation of discovering certain kinds of mineral poison in the organs; but decomposition may have advanced so flir as to destroy all pathological evi- dence. The inspection in such cases is commonly confined to the abdominal viscera. The stomach is often found so thinned and collapsed, that the anterior and posterior walls appear to form only one coat (p. 60). This organ should be removed with the duodenum, and ligatures should be applied to each. The liver and the spleen shoidd also be removed, in order that they may, if neces- sary, be separately analyzed. If poison is not found in one or more of these parts, it is not likely that it will be discovered in the body. It has been recom- mended that a portion of earth immediately above and beloAv the coffin should be removed for analysis, as it may contain arsenic; but this appears to me to be an unnecessary piece of refinement when the coffin is entire, or when the abdominal parietes still cover the viscera. If decomposition has so far advanced as to have led to an admixture of earth with the viscera, and the poison is found in minute quantity in the tissues only, the source of the poison may be regarded as doubtful. The body of a deceased person, when exhumed, should be identified by some friend or relative, in the presence of the medical ex- aminer. In one case of murder by poison, the evidence almost failed, owing to this precaution not having been taken. It is important that the viscera taken from a body which has been long in the grave should be sealed up immediately. They should not be allowed to come in contact with any metal, nor with any surface except that of clean glass, porcelain, or Avood. It has been recommended that they should be Avashed Avith chloride of lime, or placed in alcohol; but this is decidedly improper : the use of any preservative chemical liquid would not only embarrass the future analysis, but Avould render a special examination of an unused portion of the liquid necessary, the identity of which would have to be unequivocally established. Preservation from air in clean glass vessels, with Avell-fitted corks, covered with skin, or, Avhat is still better, sheet-caoutchouc, is all that is required in practice. There is no objection to the use of a small quantity of chloroform. The vapour of this liquid is diffused through the vessel and tends to retard putrefaction. The contents of a stomach, consisting of blood and mucus, have thus been preserved in an unchanged state for several months. Identity of Substances. It is necessary to observe, that all legal authorities rigorously insist upon proof being adduced of the identity of the vomited matters or other liquids taken from the body of a deceased person, Avhen poisoning is suspected. Supposing that, during the examination, the stomach and viscera are removed from the body, they should never be placed on any surface, or in any vessel, until we have first ascertained that the surface or vessel is perfectly clean. If this point be not attended to, it Avill be in the power of counsel for the defence to raise a doubt in the minds of the jury, whether the poisonous substance miglit not have been accidentally present in the vessel used. This may be regarded as a very remote presumptiori; but, nevertheless, it is upon technical objections of this kind that acquittals folloAv, in spite of the strongest presumptions of guilt. This is a question for Avhich every medical Avitness should be prepared, whether he is giving his evidence at a coroner's inquest, or in a court of law. Many might feel disposed to regard matters of this kind as involving unnecessary nicety and care, but if they are neglected


[220/1290 b21964944_0220.jp2]

156 IDENTITY OF ARTICLES FOE ANALYSIS. it is possible that a case may be at once stopped : so that the care subse- quently bestowed upon a chemical analysis will be labour thrown away. Evidence of the presence of poison in the contents of a stomach was once rejected at a trial for murder, because they had been hastily thrown into^ a jar borrowed from a neighbouring grocer's shop; and it could not be satis- factorily proved that the jar Avas clean and entirely free from traces of poison (in which the grocer dealt) when used for this purpose. When the life of a human being is at stake, as in a charge of murder by poisoning, the slightest doubt is always very properly interpreted in favour of the accused. Not only must clean vessels be used for receiving any liquid destined for subsequent chemical analysis, but care must be taken that the identity of a substance is preserved, or the most correct analysis, afterwards made, will be inadmissible as evidence. The suspected substance, when once placed in the hands of a medical man, shordd never be let out of his sight or custody. It should be kept sealed under his private seal, and locked up while in his possession, in a closet to which no other person has a key. If he has once let it out of his hands, and allowed it to pass through the hands of several other persons, then he complicates the evidence for the prosecution, by rendering it indispensable for these persons to state under what circumstances it was placed Avhile in their possession. The exposure of a suspected substance on a table, or in a closet or room, to which many have access, may be fatal to its identity ; for the chemical evidence, so important in a criminal investigation, will pro- bably be altogether rejected by the Court. A case was tried on the Norfolk circuit, in which an analysis of certain matters vomited by a person poisoned with arsenic, was not admitted as evidence against the prisoner, because the practitioner had left them in the custody of two women ; and these women had allowed the vessel containing the suspected liquid (•which was proved to contain arsenic) to be exposed in a room open to the access of many persons. In another case, tried at the Old Bailey Sessions in 1835, the analysis of some suspected liquids was not allowed in evidence, because the practitioner, Avho lived in the country, and was unwilling to take the responsibility of analysing them, had sent them up to town by a earlier to be examined by a London chemist. If closely sealed by a private seal, and this is observed by the receiver to be unbroken, before he proceeds to an analysis, this mode of transmission will not probably be objected to. When any article (e. g. a stomach or other organ) is reserved for analysis, care should be taken to attach immediately to it, or to the vessel containing it, a parchment or Avooden label, upon which is plainly written, in ink, the name of the deceased and the date of removal, including the day of the week and month. This is especially necessary when there are two or more articles for analysis. I have known the greatest inconvenience to residt from the neglect of this simple precaution. Preserving articles for Analysis.—In removing viscera or liquids fi-om the body, and reserving them for analysis, it is necessary to observe certain pre- cautions. A clean vessel with a wide mouth should be selected ; it should be only sufficiently large to hold the organ or liquid (the less air remaining in it the better) ; it should be secured by a closely fitting cork, covered with fine skin or bladder. Another piece of skin should then be tied over the mouth or, for this, sheet caoutchouc or gutta percha may be substituted with advan- tage. It should lastly be covered with tinfoil, and a layer of white leather. In this way any loss by evaporation or decomposition is prevented, and the viscera may be preserved (in a cool place) for some time. If the mouth of the vessel be too wide for a cork, the other articles cannot be dispensed with. Paper only should not be used : I have known the appearances after death of the viscera of an infant, suspected to have died from poison, entirely destroyed by dryin"-


[221/1290 b21964944_0221.jp2]

FALLACIES IN REFERENCE TO CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 157 from the evaporation which took place tlirough the layers of paper with which the vessel in which they were contained, was covered. The practitioner should bear in mind that all tliese matters are likely to come out in evidence; and Avhatever is Avorth doing at all, is worth doing well. For reasons already stated, antiseptic chemical compoimds should not be used. The addition of a small quantity of chloroform to the viscera will, without complicating the analysis, tend to preserve them. The articles used for the preservation of viscera should be in all cases scrupulously examined. Some kinds of calico are dressed with arsenic and starch paste, and many kinds of Avrapping-paper as well as wall-papers are strongly impregnated with this poison. An observation made by Mr. Aickin, of Belfast, shows that this is not an unnecessary caution. This gentleman was engaged in examining the body of a child, in order to determine the cause of death. The organs were healthy, and as no sufficient cause presented itself, he removed the stomach with a view of making an analysis of its contents. He was suddenly called away; and, to preserve the stomach, he wrapped it in a piece of paper (used for papering rooms), placing it on the iincoloured side, and he locked it in a closet until the following day. Assisted by a friend, he then analysed the contents, and found a trace of morphia with a pretty large quantity of arsenic. As the symptoms fi-om which the child had died were not those of poisoning by arsenic, and there were no appear- ances of the action of arsenic on the body, he came to the conclusion that there must be some extraneous cause to account for the presence of this poison. He examined a portion of the wall-paper in which the stomach had been wrapped, and then found that that part of it which was coloured yellow was tinted with sulphide of arsenic or orpiment! It was therefore evident, as orpiment contains white arsenic, that the stomach and its contents had imbibed a portion of the poison during the night. (' Lancet,' June 23, 1855, p. 632.) This satisfactorily accounted for the presence of arsenic, iinder circumstances which might have given rise to a false charge of murder. Nearly all wall-papers, having any tinge of green or golden yellow in them, contain arsenic, and this arsenic spreads by imbibition to other parts of the paper not so tinted. It Avould, of course, be proper to avoid in all cases the use of any wrapper having upon it mineral colours of any description. Mr. Aickin's case shows in a striking point of view the danger of trusting to chemical analysis alone. Unless we look to physiology and pathology, a most erroneous opinion may be expressed. Arsenic is sometimes found mixed with oxide of iron in ochreous deposits or soils. It is thus occasionally present in the soil of cemeteries, but in an insoluble form. Even in the fur deposited in tea-kettles, in which there is generally some oxide of iron, arsenic has been found in an insoluble form. From about a pound and a half of the crust or fur of a vessel used for boiling water. Otto obtained well-marked arsenical deposits. Pollnitz has detected in the fur of kettles—copper, lead, tin, and even antimony. Dr. Osborn, of Southampton, has confirmed Pollnitz's conclusion, namely, that lead is present in an insoluble form in the deposits of kettles and boilers. (' Med. Times and Gaz.' Dec. 22, 1860, p. 608.) Otto discovered a much larger proportion of arsenic in the calcareous crust taken from a kitchen boiler. Ten ounces of this gave a deposit of arsenic in a glass tube, and several stains on porcelain. He thinks that, if a sufficient quantity is employed, arsenic will be found in all spring and well-waters. (' Ausmittelung der Gifte,' 1856, p. 61.) I have found arsenic in the water of rivers used for the supply of towns, and have extracted a well-marked quantity from two ounces of the dried mud of the Thames, as well as from similar quantities of earth taken from three churchyards in the north of England. (' Guy's IIosp.


[222/1290 b21964944_0222.jp2]

158 ON THE USE OP NOTES IN EVIDENCE. Eeports,' Oct. 18G0. On Arsenic and Antimony.) These facts, if they prove anything, tend to show the extreme danger of placing reliance on minute chemical results in the absence of good physiological and pathological evidence. The results of an analysis, in the shape of sublimates or precipitates, should be preserved as evidence, distinctly labelled in small glass-tubes hermetically sealed. They can then, if asked for, be produced for examination at the inquest or trial. On the Use of Notes.—It has already been recommended, as a rule in these criminal investigations, that a practitioner should make notes of what he ob- serves in regard to symptoms, appearances after death, and the results of a chemical analysis. Ilis own observations should be kept distinct from in- fornation given to him by others. He may base his conclusions on the former, but not on the latter. From the common forms of law in this country, a person charged with the crime of poisoning may remain imprisoned, if at a distance fi-om the metropolis, for some months before he is brought to trial. It is obvious, however clear the circumstances may at the time appear to a practitioner, that it will require more than ordinary powers of memory to retain, for so long a period, a distinct recollection of all the facts of the case. If he is unprovided with notes, and his memory is defective, then the case will turn in favour of the prisoner, for he will be the person to benefit by the neglect of the Avitness. In adopting the plan here recommended, such a result may be easily prevented. It may be remarked that the law relative to the admissibility of notes or memoranda in evidence is very strict, and, in trials for murder, is rigorously enforced by the judges. In order to render such notes or memoranda admissible, it is indispensably necessary that they should be taken on the spot at the time the observations are made, or as soon afterwards as practicable; and, further, it must be remembered that a witness can refer to them only for the purpose of refreshing his memory. Medico-legal Reports.—One of the duties of a medical jurist is to draw up a report of the results of his examination : 1, in regard to symptoms; 2, in re- gard to appearances after death ; and, 3, in regard to the results of an analysis. With respect to the two first divisions of the report, I must refer the reader to the rules for investigating cases of poisoning (p. 152). It need hardly be observed that the time at which the person was first seen, and the circumstances under which the attendance of the practitioner was required, as well as the period of death, should be particularly stated. The hour, the day of the week, and the month, should be invariably mentioned. Some medical witnesses merelv state the day of the week, without that of the month, or vice versa. At a trial this sometimes creates great confusion, by rendering a reference to almanacs neces- sary. The words yesterday, next day, &c., should never be used. The facts which it will be necessary to enter in the report are fspecially stated under the heads of investigation (see p. 153.) If these facts are not observed in the order there set down, their value as evidence of the cause of death, or of the criminality or innocence of particular parties, will be entirely lost. In draw- ing up a report of symptoms and appearances after death, the facts should be in the first instance plainly and concisely stated seriatim^ in language easily intelligible to non-professional persons. A reporter is not called upon to dis- play his erudition, but to make himself understood. If technical terms are employed, their meaning should be stated in parentheses. When a subject is thoroughly understood, there can be no difficulty in rendering it in simple language ; and when it is not well understood, the practitioner is not in a position to make any report. Magistrates, coroners, and barristers are verv acute, and easily detect ignorance, even Avhen it appears under the mask of erudition.


[223/1290 b21964944_0223.jp2]

159 CONSTRUCTION OF MEDICO-LEGAL REPORTS. In recording facts a reporter should not enciimber his stiitements Avith opinions, inferences, or comments. The facts should be first stated and the conclusions should be reserved until the end of the report. The language in which conclusions are expressed, should be precise and clear. It must be re- membered that these are intended to form a concise summary of the whole report, upon which the judgment of a magistrate, or the decision of a coro- ner's jury, will be ultimately based. They should be most strictly confined to the matters which are the subject of inquiry, and which have actually fallen under the observation of the witness. Thus, they commonly refer to the fol- lowing questions:—What was the cause of death? What are the medical circumsta,nces which lead you to suppose that death was caused by poison? What are the circvimstances which lead you to suppose that death was not caused by natural disease? Answers to one or all of these questions comprise, in general, all that a reporter is required to introduce into the conclusions of his report. The reporter must remember that his conclusions are to be based only upon medical facts,—not upon moral circumstances, unless he is specially required to express his opinion with regard to them Avhen they are of a medico-moral nature. Further, they nuist be founded only on what he has himself seen or observed. Any information derived from others, should not be made the basis of an opinion in a medico-legal report. It is scarcely necessary to remark that a conclusion based upon mQre probabilities is of no value as evidence. In drawing up a report on the restdts of a chemical analysis, the following rules may be borne in mind. A liquid or solid is received for analysis. 1. W^hen, and of whom, or how received? 2. In what state was it received— secured in any way, or exposed? 3. If more than one substance received, each to be separately and distinctly labelled ; appearance of the vessel, its capa- city, and the quantity of liquid (by measure) or solid (by weight) contained therein. 4. Where and when did you proceed to make the analysis, and where Avas the substance kept during the intermediate period? 5. Did any one assist you, or did you make the analysis yourself ? 6. Physical characters of the substance. 7. Processes and tests employed for determining whether it contained poison. All the steps of these processes need not be described;— a general outline of the analysis Avill suffice. The magistrate may thus satisfy himself by an appeal to others (if necessary) whether the analysis has or has not been properly made. 8. Supposing the substance to contain poison—is this in a pure state or mixed Avith any other body? 9. The strength of the poison, if an acid, or if it be in solution : in all cases, the quantity of poison found, determined if possible by actual Aveighing. 10. Supposing no poison to be contained in it, Avhat Avas the nature of the substance ? Did it contain anything of a noxious nature, i. e. likely to injure health or destroy life? 11. Could the supposed poisonous substance exist naturally or be produced within the body? 12. Was it present in any of the liquids or solids employed in the chemical analysis? 13. Was it contained in any of the articles of food or medicine taken by the deceased? 14. Is its i^resence to be ascribed to the use of any mineral matter employed by injection after death for the preservation of the body of the deceased? 15. What quantity of poison Avas actually separated in the free or absorbed state? 16. Hoav much of the substance found Avould, under the circumstances, be likely to destroy life ?_ There are few reports in which answers to many of these questions, although not formally put, Avill not be required ; and unless the Avhole of them are borne in mind by the operator at the time an analysis is undertaken, those Avhich are omitted can never receive an ansAver, however important to the ends of justice that answer may ultimately become.


[224/1290 b21964944_0224.jp2]

160 SYMPTOMS OF POISONING BY SULPHURIC ACID. lEKITANT POISONS. CHAPTER 12. SULPHURIC ACID OR OIL OF VITRIOL. SYMPTOMS APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH FATAL DOSE PERIOD AT WHICH DEATH TAKES PLACE MODE OF DETECTING the poison in pure and mixed liquids in articles of clothing. Sulphuric Acid, or Oil of Vitriol. Sulphate of Indigo. Symptoms.—When this poison is swallowed in a concentrated form, the symptoms produced, come on either immediately, or during the act of swallow- ing. There is violent burning pain, extending through the throat and gullet to the stomach, and the pain is often so severe that the body is bent. There is an escape of gaseous and frothy matter, followed by retching and vomiting, the latter accompanied by the discharge of shreds of tough mucus and of a liquid of a dark coffee-ground colour, mixed with blood. The mouth is excoriated, the lining membrane and surface of the tongue Avhite, or resembling soaked parchment; in one instance the appearance of the mouth was as if it had been smeared with Avhite paint. After a time, the membrane acquires a grey or brownish colour ; the mouth is filled with a thick viscid substance con- sisting of saliva, mucus, and the corroded membrane : this renders speaking and swallowing difficult. If the poison has been administered by a spoon, or the phial containing it has been passed to the back of the throat, the mouth may escape the chemical action of the acid. A medical witness must bear this circumstance in mind, when he is called to examine an infant suspected to have been poisoned by sulphuric acid. Around the lips and on the neck may be found spots of a brown colour from the spilling of the acid and its action on the skin. There is great difficulty of breathing, owing to the swelling and exco- xiation of the throat and larynx, and the countenance has from this cause, a "bluish or livid appearance ; the least motion of the abdominal muscles is at- tended with increase of pain. These symptoms, although characteristic of the action of a corrosive liquid, have been sometimes mistaken for those of disease. (' Henke, Zeitschrift der S. A.' 1843, 2, 284.) The stomach is so irritable, that whatever is swallowed is immediately ejected, and the vomiting is commonly violent and incessant. In a case reported by Dr. Geoghegan, of Dublin, the patient (a female) vomited for three or four hours. This symptom then ceased, and did not recur, although the woman did not die until thirty-four hours after the poison had been swallowed. (' Med. Gaz.' Vol. 48, p. 328.) The matters first vomited generally contain the poison : they are acid, and if they fall on a limestone pavement there is effervescence; if on coloured articles of dress, the colour is sometimes altered to a red or yelJow, or it is entirely discharged and the texture of the stuff destroyed; on a black cloth dress, the spots produced by the concentrated acid are reddish brown, and remain moist for a considerable time. An attention to these circumstances may often lead to a suspicion of the real cause of the symptoms, when the facts are con- cealed. After a time there is great exhaustion, accompanied by great Aveak- ness; the pulse becomes quick, small, and feeble; the skin cold, mottled and covered with a clammy sweat. There is generally great thirst, with obstinate constipation of the bowels; should any evacxiations take place, they are commonly either of a dark bro^ra or leaden colour, in some instances almost black arising from an admixture of altered blood. There are sometimes con- vulsive motions of the muscles, especially those of the face and lips The


[225/1290 b21964944_0225.jp2]

SULPHURIC ACID. APPEARANCES. IGl countenance, if not livid from obstructed respiration, is pale, expressive of great anxiety and intense suffering. Tlie intellectual faculties are quite clear, and death iisually takes place very suddenly, in from eighteen to twenty-four hours after the poison has been taken. Appearances after Death.—The marked effects of this poison are not always observed in the stomach ; they may be confined to the region of the throat and windpipe. In an inspection of the body, the Avhole course of the alimentary canal from the mouth downwards, should be examined; since in recent or acute cases it is in the throat and gullet, that we generally obtain strong evidence of the action of a corrosive poison. The discovery of the usual marks of corrosion in these parts, is always highly corroborative of the signs of poisoning found in the stomach. During the inspection, the examiner must not omit to notice any spots on the skin produced by the action of the acid : these arc commonly of a dark brown colour, and are situated about the mouth, lips, and neck. The appearances met with in the body vary, accord- ing to wdiether death has taken place rapidly or slowly. Supposing the case to have proved rapidly fatal, the membrane linmg the mouth may be found white, softened, and corroded. The mucous membrane of the throat and gullet is commonly found corroded, having a brown-black, or ash-grey colour, and blood is effused in patches beneath it. The corroded membrane of the gullet is occasionally disposed in longitudinal folds, portions of it being partly detached. The stomach, if not perforated, is collapsed and contracted. On laying it open, tlie contents are commonly found of a dark brown or black colour and of a tarry consistency, being formed in great part of mucus and altered blood. The contents may or may not be acid, according to the time the patient has survived, and the treatment which has been adopted. On re- moving them, the stomach may be seen traversed by black lines, or the whole of the mucous membrane may be corrugated, and stained black or of a dark brown colour. This blackness is not entirely removed by washing. On .stretching the stomach, traces of inflammation may be found between the folds, indicated by a dark crimson red colour. On forcibly removing the bhvckened membrane, the red colour indicative of inflammation may be seen in the parts beneath. Both the dark colour and marks of inflanmiation are sometimes partial, being confined to isolated portions or patches of the mucous membrane. When the stomach is perforated, the coats are softened, and the edge of the aperture is commonly black and irregular. In removing the stomach, the opening is liable to be made larger by the mere weight of the organ. The contents do not always escape; but Avhen this happens, the surrounding parts are attacked by the poison. In a case which occurred at Guy's Hospi- tal, the spleen, the liver, and the coats of the aorta, were found blackened and corroded by the acid, which had escaped through the perforation. When a person has survived for eighteen or tAventy hours, traces of corrosive and in- flammatory action may be found in the small intestines. In one case the mucous membrane of the ileum was corroded. The interior of the windpipe as well as of the bronchial tubes, has also presented marks of the local action of the acid. The acid has thus destroyed life without reaching the stomach. A remarkable instance in Avhich the poison penetrated into and destroyed both lungs has been reported by Dr. Gull. (See ' Med. Gaz.' vol. 45, p. 1102.) It is important' for a medical witness to bear in mind, that the mouth, throat. And gullet are not always found in the state above described. Dr. Ogle met with a case in which the membrane of the tongue was but slightly affected. The man had swallowed a large dose of the acid and had died in nine hours. (Med. Times and Gazette, April 21, 18(50.) Strange as it may appear, cases are recorded in which, notwithstanding the introduction of this poison into the stomach, the gullet has escaped its chemical action. Mr. Dickinson has M


[226/1290 b21964944_0226.jp2]

POISONING BY SULrilUKIC ACID. FATAL DOSE. 102 reported a case of poisoning by sulphuric acid in Avliicli there was no corro- s^ion of the mouth and throat. The patient, a female, a;t. 52, recovered m about five months. The stomach had probably sustained injury, as the most urgent symptoms Avere consUuit vomiting after taking food, and obstinat^ constipation. The quantity of acid swallowed Avas half an ounce, mixed with half an ounce of water. The patient felt mmediateli/ a burning sensation at the pit of the stomach (* Lancet,' Nov. 26, 1853, p. 502). The acid had here evidently lost its corrosive pcAver by dilution. (See ' On Poisons—Sulphuric Acid; p. 253.) When the acid has been taken in a still more diluted state, the marks of inflammation on the mucous membrane are less decided, and the blackening is not so considerable. Nevertheless, the acid, unless too much diluted, acts upon and darkens the blood in the vessels, as well as that contained in the stomach, although it may not blacken the mucous membrane or the contents. Dr. Walker, of Inverness, met with a case in which a man, jet. thirty, SAvallowed fifteen drachms and a half of sulphuric acid (sp. gr. 1-842), and died tAventy-five hours aftei-Avards. Half an hour after taking the poison he resembled a patient in the collapsed stage of cholera. The inside of the lijis, asAvell as the tongue and throat, Avere sAvollen, and had the appearance of being smeared Avith thin arroAv-root. He suffered severe pain, but did not vomit until three-quarters of an hour had elapsed : the A'omiting appeared to be then excited by the liquid Avhich had been given to him. The vomited matters Avere dark, bloody and viscid. The patient Avas sensible up to the time of his death. An inspection revealed the usual appearances. The mucous membrane of the stomach was destroyed, and the Avhole surface Avas darkened. The greatest amount of injury Avas at the pyloric end, Avhere three small perforations Avere found. The orifice of the j^ylorus AA^as SAVollen, constricted, and hardened ; it Avas so small as to admit only a silver probe. The duo- denum had also suffered. The first tAvo inches of the arch of the aorta Avere much inflamed. There Avere no traces of the acid in the stomach ; there Avas a slight trace in the duodenum ; a trace in the serous fluid at the base of the brain ; but the largest quantity AA'as found in the blood contained in the heart. (' Edin. Monthly Jour.' June, 1850, p. 538.) This case is remarkable in the fact that vomiting Avas not immediate ; that tl.ere Avere no spots on the outside of the face; that the poison Avas SAvalloAved in large quantity on an empty stomach ; and there Avas free voluntary exertion, as, twenty hours after he had taken the poison, the man got out of bed and sat on a night-stool. Dr. Geoghegan, of Dublin, has published in the London ' Medical Gazette' (vol. 48, p. 328), a full account of the symptoms and appearances after death in a Avell-marked case of poisoning by sulphuric acid, as Avell as of a process for detecting this poison Avhen absorbed. Quantity required to destroy Life.—The dangerous effects of the acid ap- pear to arise rather from its degree of concentration, than from the absolute quantity taken. The quantity actually required to prove fatal, must depend on many circumstances. If the stomach is full Avhen the poison is SAvalloAved, the action of the acid may be spent on the food and not on the stomach; antl a larger quantity might then be taken than Avould suffice to destroy life if the organ Avere empty. The smallest quantity which is described as havino- proved fatal Avas in the following case :—Half a tea-spoonful of concentrated sulphuric acid was given to a child about a year old by mistake for castor oil. The usual symptoms came on, Avith great disturbance of breathing ; and the child died in tAventy-four hours. The quantity here taken could not have exceeded forty drops. (Med. Gaz. vol. 29, p. 147.) It is, however, doubtful whether this small quantity Avould have proved fatal to an adult. The smallest fatal dose which Dr. Christison states he has found recorded, is one


[227/1290 b21964944_0227.jp2]

PERIOD OF DfL\TH. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 163 draclim; it -vyas taken by mistake by a stout young man, and killed him in seven days. (Op. cit. 1G2.) Even when diluted, it will destroy life rapidly. A man swallowed, on an empty stomach, six drachms of the strongest acid diluted with eighteen drachms of water. He suffered from the usual symp- toms, and died in two hours and a half. (' Med. Times and Gaz.' 18G3, vol. 1, p. 183.) Period at which Death takefi place.—It has been already stated, that the average period at which death takes place in cases of acute poisoning by sulphuric acid, is from eighteen to twenty-four hours. When the stomach is perforated by the acid, it commonly proves more speedily fatal. In one in- stance, reported by Dr. Sinclair, a child about four years old died in four hox;rs: the stomach was found perforated. When the poison acts upon the windpipe, death may be a still more speedy consequence, from suffocation ; and, owing to this, it appears to be more rapidly fatal to children than adults. Dr. Craigie mentions a case in Avhich three ounces of concentrated sulphuric acid destroyed life in three hours and a half. Remer met with an instance in which death took place in iico hours. A case is reported by Mr. Watson, in which a woman SAvallowed two ounces of the strong acid. She died in half an hour, but it ajipears that a quarter of an horn- before death, she had made a deep wound in her throat, which gave rise to great bleeding. The stomach was found extensively perforated : but it is highly probable that the wound accelerated death in this case. The shortest case recorded, occuiTed to M. Kapp. A man, a3t. fifty, swallowed three ounces and a half of concentrated sulphuric acid. He died in three-quarters of an hour. (' Gazette Medicale,' Dec. 28, 1850.) On the other hand, there are numerous instances reported in which the poison proved fatal from secondary causes, at periods varying from one week to sevei-al months. Chemical Analysis.—This acid may be met with either concentrated or diluted ; and a medical jurist may have to examine it under three conditions: —1. In its simple state.—2. When mixed with organic matters, as with liquid articles of food, or in the contents of the stomach.—3. On solid organic sub- stances, as where the acid has been thrown or spilled on articles of dress or clothing. In the simple state. If concentrated, it possesses these properties: 1. Wood, sugar, or other organic matter plunged into it, is speedily carbonized or charred, either with or without the application of heat. 2. When boiled with Avood, copper-cuttings, or mercuiy, it evolves fumes of sulphurous acid; this is immediately known by the odour, as well as by the acid vapour first rendering blue, and then bleaching, starch-paper dipped in a solution of iodic acid. 3. When mixed wath an equal bulk of water, great heat is evolved— nearly 200° F., in a cold vessel. The diluted Acid. For the acid in a diluted state, but one test may be ap- plied : this is a solution of a salt of baryta, either the 7iitrate ofharyia, or the chloride of barium. Having ascertained by test-paper that the liquid is acid, we add to a portion of it a few drops of nitric acid, and then a solution of nitrate of baryta. If sulphuric acid is present, a dense white precipitate of sulphate of baryta will fall doAvn : this is insoluble in all acids and alkalies. If the precipitate is collected, dried, and heated to redness in a small platinum crucible, or in a folded piece of platinum foil, with five or six parts of charcoal powder, it will, if a sulphate, be converted into sulphide of barium. To prove this, we add to the calcined residue, hydrochloric acid, at the same time sus- pending over it a sHp of filtering paper moistened with a solution of acetate of lead, or, what is more convenient, we place the residue on a slip of glazed card (coated with carbonate of lead), scraped and wetted on the surfiice. (The card should be first tested for lead, because some kinds of glazed cards M 2


[228/1290 b21964944_0228.jp2]

1G4 PEOCESSES FOR DETECTING SULniURIC ACID. are made without lead.) If the original precipitate was a sulphate, the- gas evolved, will be sulphurettcul hydrogen, known by its odour, and oy its turning the salt of lead, or staining the card of a brown colour. If some of the powder is dropped into a solution of nitroprusside of sodium, this liquid acquires a rich purple colour. The smallest visible quantity of sulphate of baryta thus easily admits of detection. The ferrocyanide of potassium may be substituted for charcoal m the pro- portion of one part of ferrocyanide to three or four parts of sulphate of baryta. The mixture may be heated to redness either in a reduction-tube by a spirit lamp, or in a small porcelain crucible, covered with a layer of mica : it speedily blackens and fuses. The fused residue when cooled, may be proved to contam sulphide of barium. On the addition of hydrochloric acid, sulphuretted hydro- gen gas is set free, a fact which may be demonstrated by the use of lead-paper as well as by the odour. The gas is mixed with some hydrocyanic acid vapour. If a reduction-tube has been used, the fused mass may be separated by filing off the end of the tube containing it. The mass reduced to powder and placed on a glazed card wetted with distilled water, produces a brown stain of sulphide of lead. Some fragments placed in a glass containing a solution of nitro- prusside of sodium, will impart to the liquid a rich purple colour if a sulphide is present. A portion of the mixture of sulphate and ferrocyanide may be heated on a stout platinum wire, in the reduction-flame of a spirit-lamp or of a Bunsen's jet. If the wire with the fused mass is then placed qii a glazed card moistened with a drop of Avater, a brown stain of sulphide of lead is immediately produced. This simple experiment renders a crucible or reduc- tion-tube unnecessary. The ferrocyanide effects the conversion of the sulphate into sulphide, more speedily and at a lower temperature than charcoal. In a medico-legal analysis it may be desirable to heat an equal portion of the ferrocyanide alone, and test the fused residue in the manner described, in order to remove any objection arising ffom the alleged presence of an alkaline sulphate as impurity. Diluted sulphuric acid does not carbonize organic substances which are immersed in it. The application of heat will only effect carbonization when the water of the acid is entirely evaporated. Thus, paper wetted with the diluted acid, becomes charred when dried and heated. This may serve as a method of identification in the absence of tests. In Liquids containing organic Matter.—If sulphuric acid is mixed with sucli liquids as porter, coffee, or tea, the process for its detection is substantially the same, the liquid being first rendered clear by filtration. The precipitated sulphate of baryta, if mixed with organic matter, may be purified by boiling it in strong nitric acid; but this is not commonly necessary, as the reduction of the dried precipitate may be equally well performed with the impure, as "vyith the pure sulphate. Some liquids, such as vinegar, porter, and most wines, generally contain sulphuric acid or a sulphate, but the acid is in small proportion; therefore, if there is an abundant precipitate, there can be no doubt, ca^teris paribus., that free sulphuric acid has been added to them. Should the liquid be thick and viscid like gruel, it may be diluted with water, and then boiled with the addition of a little acetic acid. For the action of the barytic test, it is fiot necessary that the liquid should be absolutely clear, provided it is not so thick as to interfere mechanically with the precipitation of the suljjhate of baryta. So flu- with regard to articles administered, or of which tlie administration has been attempted. A similar process may be applied to the examination of matters vomited and of the contents of the stomach., care being taken to separate the insoluble parts by filtration, before adding the test. The coats of the stomach should be cut up and then boiled in distilled water for some time for the perfect extraction of the acid.


[229/1290 b21964944_0229.jp2]

NON-DETECTION OF THE ACID. CASES. 165 It is a medico-legal flict of considerable importance, tliat the contents of a stomach in a case of poisoning by sulphuric acid, are sometimes entirely free from any traces of this poison, even when it has been swallowed in large quantity. The acid is not commonly found when the individual has been under treatment, when there has been considerable vomiting, aided by the drinking of water or other simple liquids, or when the person has survived several days. If the case has been under treatment, the acid is cither wholly absent or neiitralized by antidotes. A girl swalloAved four or five ounces of diluted vitriol, and died in eighteen hours. No portion of the acid could be detected in the stomach ; but she had vomited considerably, and the acid was easily proved to exist in the vomited matters, by examining a portion of the sheet of a bed which had become wetted by them. In another case, nearly two ounces of the concentrated acid were swallowed; the patient died in twenty-five hours; the stomach was extensively acted on, and yet no trace of the acid could be discovered in the contents. The liquidity of the poison, and the facility with which it becomes mixed with other liquids and ejected by vomiting, will readily furnish an explanation of this fact. Li many cases of poisoning by sulphuric acid, therefore, a medical witness must be prepared to find, that chemical analysis will furnish only negative results. This, however, is not inconsistent with death having taken place from the poison. The facts are so conclusive on this point, that I should not have thought it necessary to add to the evidence accumulated on the subject, but that an erroneous statement has been put prominently before the public that no person can die from poison, except the poison be found in the body. Casper has dealt Avith this question. He relates three cases of poisoning by sulphuric acid, which occurred to himself, one which proved fatal in eight days a second in five days, and a third in three days. In not one instance could a trace of the poison be found. (Handb. der Ger. Med. i. vol. 1, p. 421, 429.) In the second case two tablespoonfuls were swallowed by a girl. The analysis revealed merely the accidental presence of a fractional part of a grain of alkaline sulphate in the stomach and bowels. Thus there was an entire failure of proof from chemistry, while the facts of the cuso, and the appearances in the body, established conclusively that death had really been caused by .sulphuric acid. In one instance, in which death took place on the eleventh day, I foimd no trace of sulphuric acid in the body. If the stomach should be perforated, the contents will be found in the abdomen, or perhaps in the lower part of the cavity of the pelvis: they may then be collected, boiled with distilled Avater, and the solution examined for the acid by the process already described. If the contents of the stomach are highly putrefied the sulphuric acid may be found combined with ammonia. A chemical analysis not only aids a medical jurist to point out a criminal: it sometimes tends to show in a conclusive manner that an accused person is or may be innocent. In Rerj. v. Hartleij (Central Criminal Court, May 1850), the prisoner, a girl, was charged Avith attempting to administer oil of vitriol in coffee to her father. The prisoner usually made the coffee for breakfast, and would then have had an opportunity of adding it to the liquid. It might however, have been mixed with the coffee in the cup after it had been poured out; and, in this case, other persons had had the opportunity of poisoning the cofl^ee. This question was solved by the aid of chemistry. I procured the coffee-pot, and found that it was old and rusty; the poisoned coffee Avas tested, and it contained no trace of iron, but on Avarming a small quantity of the acid cofl'ee in the pot, it was immediately and strongly impregnated with sulphate of iron. It Avas therefore clear that the acid had not been mixed Avith the coffee in the pot, and might have aflerAvards been put into the cup Avithout the knoAvledgc of the prisoner. Numerous other cases will


[230/1290 b21964944_0230.jp2]

DETECTION OE SULPIIUKIC ACID OX CLOTHING. 106 suggest themselves in which a guilty person may be detected, and an innocent person pretexted, by the aid of a chemical analysis of the poisoned liquid. In 7%. V. iV^ori/t (Guildford Summer Assizes, 1846) the proof of administra- tion rested in part on the carbonizing action of oil of vitriol on sugar. Mary North was charged with the murder of an infant by giving to it oil of vitriol. The deceased had died from the effects of the poison ; therefore the only part of the case which created difficulty was the proof of administration. The mother •of the deceased, wishing to give the child some aniseed-spirit and water, placed a lump of sugar in a white cup, and added a tea-spoonful of the spirit; she then went to another apartment, and poured from a kettle about a tea-spoonful of water. She observed no particular appearance in the mixture ; she tasted it, there was no hot or acid taste, there was no blackening or change of colour; she then gave the mixture to the infant, while a little girl who vv^as present drank up the dregs, and suffered no ill effects. The prisoner was present, and in about half a minute took the child. After the child had taken this liquid, there were no symptoms or effects to attract attention, and it appeared relieved of the wind from w-hich it had suffered. The mother left the room, and the prisoner then took the infant into an adjoining pantry, in which it was sworn there was a bottle of vitriol, put there by the prisoner. In about a minute and a half or two minutes, the mother, owing to a noise which she heard, re- turned to the room, and found her infant evidently writhing in great pain, and its mouth covered with a whitish froth. The prisoner, while bringing the child from the pantry into the kitchen, was, according to one witness, in the act of wiping its mouth with a napkin, on which sulphuric acid was found. Medical assistance was immediately sent for; but in spite of treatment the child died. The defence was, that the mother herself had made a mistake, and had given a tea-spoonful of oil of vitriol to her infant in place of aniseed ; but that was chemically impossible under the cii'cumstances, as the child who drank the dregs of the mixture did not suffer, and the mixture could not have been made as described by the mother, without blackening the sugar. In spite of these obvious conclusions, the jury acquitted the prisoner; but the medical and chemical facts of the case clearly proved that the mother could not have made the mistake suggested. (See ' Guy's Hospital Reports,' vol. 4, p. 396.) On solid organic Substances. It sometimes happens in cases of poisoning by sulphuric acid that it is spilled upon articles of clothing, such as cloth or linen, and here a medical jurist may succeed in detecting it, when every other source of chemical evidence fails. Again sulphuric acid is often used for the purpose of seriously injuring a party, as by throwing it on the person, an offence which, when accompanied Avith bodily injury, renders the offender liable to a severe punishment. On such occasions, proof of the corrosive nature of the liquid is required; and this is easily obtained by a chemical examination of a part of the dress. The process of analysis is very simple. The cloth should be digested in a small quantity of distilled water at a gentle heat, whereby a brownish coloured liquid may be obtained on filtration. If sulphuric acid is present, the liquid will have an acid reaction, and produce the usual effects with the barytic test. Old stains are known by the complete destruction of the organic fibre : fresh stains by their dampness. The acid remains fixed in the stuff. I have thus detected it after the long period of twenty-seven years. The detection of spots of this acid on clothing, has in some cases served to supply the place of direct evidence from a chemical analysis of the stomach; and in other instances it has aided justice in fixing on an accused person, the act of administration. Jean Aitkin, or Thmphrej/s, was tried at the Aberdeen geptember Circuit, 1830, for the murder of her husband, by pouring sulphuric acid down his throat as he lay asleep in bed. The parties frequently quarrelled,


[231/1290 b21964944_0231.jp2]

167 CHEMICAL EVIDENCE OF ADMINISTRATION. and were both addicted to habits of intoxication. On the night in question, some friends had passed the evening with them, drinking. They left the house about twelve o'clock at night, and soon after this, tlie deceased was seen asleep in bed. The only pei'sons in the house at this time were the prisoner and a servant-maid, and the street door was locked, so that no other person could have had access. The prisoner left the servant's room on her stocking-soles, a thing unusual for her, and when she returned in about twenty minutes, she told the servant that her husband was roaring mad Avith drink. The girl, upon going to him, found him lying upon his back, declaring that he was all roasting. The prisoner at first showed an unwillingness to send for a medical man, but at length did so. When the deceased left his guests at twelve, there were only two glasses on the table in the room; but when the neighbours came in after the alarm, there were three^ and the third was pi'oved to have come from a room above stairs, of which the prisoner had the key. This glass contained, it was supposed, sulphuric acid. In the room where the deceased Avas lying there was a phial Avhich had contained sulphuric acid, but it Avas then nearly empty. The deceased lived two days, but never could give any further account of the matter than that he Avent to sleep quite Avell, and aAvoke ' all roasting,' and had suffered the utmost agony ever since. He evidently died from the effects of sulphuric acid, large quantities of Avhich Avere detected on his shirt, on the blanket and bedcoA'er, and a little on the prisoner's bed- goAvn and handkerchief; but not a trace of the poison could be discovered in the stomach or intestines of the deceased. (Alison, ' Criminal LaAv of Scot- land,' p. 75; also 'Medical Gazette,' vol. 8, p. 77.) In the defence, it Avas alleged that the deceased had voluntarily taken the poison and committed suicide ; but the only time at Avhich he could by any possibility have taken it, Avas Avhen he Avas drinking Avith his friends; for immediately after they left, he Avent to bed, and Avas seen asleep; and, according to his own account, he aAVoke suddenly Avith the pain and other symptoms produced by this poison. It was impossible that he could have sAvalloAved the acid Avhile drinking Avith his friends; for the symptoms of the corrosives come on sudde.nlji, and cannot be suspended; therefore the poison must have been poured down his throat Avhile he was sleeping, and as the house was at that time fastened up, this act could only have been perpetrated by the prisoner or the maid-servant. ■ The circumstances above mentioned clearly shoAved that the prisoner Avas the guilty party. The case of Catherine Wilson (C. C. C. June 18G2) presents some features of interest in this respect. The prisoner acted as nurse to the prosecutrix, and Avas 'at the same time secretly cohabiting Avith her husband. She pro- cured a black draught at a druggist's, and administered it to the prosecutrix in a glass, in Avhich, hoAvever, there Avas strong reason to believe she had previously placed a quantity of oil of vitriol. The prosecutrix felt the glass Avarm, and on the prisoner pouring more of the liquid (the black draught) into it, the Avarmth so increased, that she told the pri.soner she must have boiled the medicine and she could not drink it. At the persuasion of the prisoner she took a mouthful, but immediately spat out the liquid, which burnt her mouth, and, as it Avas afterwards found, corroded her dress and the bedclothes. It Avas proved that the bottle containing the draught supplied by the druggist Avas cold; and that there Avas no Avarmth until after the mixture Avas made in the glass by the prisoner. OAving to some omission on the part of the prosecution, the clothes Avere not analyzed, and there was no chemical evidence of sulphuric acid having been used, except the heat on mixture Avith a Avatery draught and the action of the acid on the bedclothes. These facts, however, Avith the corrosive action on the mouth of the prosecutrix, Avere quite sufficient to prove medically that


[232/1290 b21964944_0232.jp2]

POISONING BY SULPHATE OF INDIGO. 168 sulphuric acid had been administered, although none of the draught or of the acid employed, could be procured for analysis. In the entire absence of direct chemical evidence, the jury were persuaded to acquit the woman. In the following October, the prisoner, who was acquitted of this charge, Avas con- victed and executed for poisoning another woman whom she had nursed some time before. She had in a period of ten years acted as nurse to several other persons who had all died under symptoms of poisoning Avith colchicum ! In the above case, it will be observed, the poison was not swallowed, but this does not affect the criminality of the act. In Reg. v. Paxton (C. C. C. June 1863) Baron Bramwell held that it was not necessary that the poison (sulphuric acid) should be swallowed : it was quite sufficient to constitute the crime, if any portion of it, however small, should have been taken into the mouth. The importance of analysis applied to articles of clothing was made evident in the case Reg. v. Brown (Bury St. Edmunds, Lent Assizes, 1864). The deceased, aged three years, was an illegitimate child of the prisoner. It was living with the prisoner's father and mother. On the day of its death, the prisoner came to see the child and was with it alone in a bedroom : in fve minutes after she had left the room, no other person being present, the child was heard to be sick, and it Avas found to be suffering from the effects of some corrosive acid. The child died in about nine or ten hours, and the symptoms during life, when it Avas seen by a medical man, as Avell as the appearances in the body after death, were clearly those of poisoning by oil of vitriol. Mr. Image detected the acid in vomited matter on the shirt of the child, and on a dress Avorn by the mother on the occasion of her visit. It Avas further proved that a bottle of vitriol, kept in a closet of the house where she was servant, was missing. In spite of these strong facts in proof of ad- ministration, the jury, luider the charge of the judge, Cockburn, C. J., acquitted the prisoner. It Avas someAvhat remarkable that the child did not scream from pain during the act of SAvallowing, and that attention should not have been called to its condition until after the lapse of five minutes. Still the facts appeared to point to the prisoner only, as the person Avho administered the poison. Sulphate of Indigo. Several cases of accidental poisoning by this liquid have occurred. As the compound is notliing more than a solution of indigo in strong sulphuric acid, the symptoms and appearances after death, are similar to those which have been already described. This kind of poisoning may be suspected when, together Avith these symptoms, the membrane of the mouth has a blue or blue-black colour. The vomited matters, as Avell as the fseces, are at first of a deep blue-black tint; afterwards green ; and it Avas observed in tAvo instances that the urine, voided by the patients, had a blue tinge. It is proper to notice, that as indigo is one of the substances now directed by the statute to be mixed Avith arsenic AAdien sold in small quantities, the detection of this colouring principle in the mouth and vomited matters Avill not necessarily shoAV that it has been taken in the form of sulphate. Analysis.—This solution is of a dark blue colour, and strongly acid. Sul- phuric acid is detected in it by the methods above described. The blue colour is discharged by chlorine, or Avhen a portion previously diluted has been boiled Avith nitric acid.


[233/1290 b21964944_0233.jp2]

169 SYMrTOMS OF POISONING BY NITRIC ACID. CHAPTER 13. rOISONING BY NITRIC ACID OR AQUA FORTIS APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH—. PROCESSES FOR DETECTING THE POISON IN PURE AND ORGANIC LIQUIDS POISONING BY HYDROCHLORIC ACID. Nitric acid is popularly knoAvn under the name of Aqna fortis, or Red spirit of nitre. According to Tartra, it seems to have been first used as a poison about the middle of the fifteenth century. Although it is perhaps much more used in the arts than oil of vitriol, cases of poisoning by it are by no means common. Sijmptoms.—When the acid is in a concentrated state, the symptoms, on the whole, bear a close resemblance to those produced by sulphuric acid. They come on immediateli/, and the swallowing of the acid is accompanied by in- tense burning pain in the throat and gullet extending doAvnwards to the stomach : there are gaseous eructations, from the chemical action of the poison, swelling of the abdomen, violent vomiting of liquid or solid matters, mixed with altered blood of a dark brown colour, and shreds of yellowish- coloured mucus, having a strong acid reaction. The abdomen is generally exquisitely tender; but in one well-marked case of poisoning by the acid, the pain was chiefly confined to the throat: probably the poison had not reached the stomach. The mucous membrane of the mouth is commonly soft and white, after a time becoming yellow, or even brown; the teeth are also white, and the enamel is partially desti-oyed by the chemical action of the acid. There is great difficulty of speaking and swallowing, the mouth being filled with viscid mucus : the power of swallowing is, indeed, sometimes entirely lost. On opening the mouth, the tongue may be found swollen, and of a citron colour; the tonsils are also SAvollen and enlarged. The difficulty of breathing is occasionally such as to render tracheotomy necessary, especially in young persons. (See case by Mr. Arnott,' Med. Gaz.' vol. 12, p. 220.) As the symptoms progress, the pulse becomes small, frequent, and irregular—the surface of the body extremely cold, and there are frequent rigors (shivering). The administration of remedies, even the swallowing of the smallest quantity of liquid, increases the severity of the pain, occasions vomiting, and gives rise to a feeling of laceration or corrosion. (Tartra, 144.) There is obstinate constipation. Death takes place in from eighteen to twenty-four hours, and is sometimes preceded by a kind of stupor, from which the patient is easily roused. The intellectual faculties commonly remain clear until the last. In one instance the patient was insensible, but she ultimately recovered. Death may be occasioned by the action of this acid on the larynx, as in the case of sulphuric acid. Should the patient survive the first effects of the poison, the mucous membrane of the throat and gullet may be discharged, either in irregular masses, or in the form of a complete cylinder. There is great irritability of the ston)ach, with pain on taking food, frequent vomiting and ultimate destruction of the powers of digestion: the patient becomes slowly emaciated, and dies, sometimes after many months, from starvation or ex- haustion. A man swallowed nitric acid in beer : he recovered from the first symptoms, but died six months afterwards, evidently from the injury caused by the poison to the mucous lining of the stomach. He suffered from pain and fi-om such irritability in this organ, that neither solids nor fluids could be retained. ('Lancet,' Nov. 24, 1860, p. 510.) The vapow of this acid is destructive to life. In March 1854, Mr. Haywood, a chemist of Sheffield, lost his life under the following circum- stances :—He was pouring a mixture of nitric and sulphuric acids from a carboy containing about sixty pounds, Avhen by some accident the vessel was


[234/1290 b21964944_0234.jp2]

170 NITRIC ACID. FATAL EFFECTS OF THE VAFOUR. broken. For a few minufes he inhaled the fumes of the mixed acids, but it does not appear that any of the hquid fell over him. Three hours after the accident, he was sitting up and appeared to be in moderately good health. He was then seen by a medical man, and complained merely of some cuts aliout his hands. He coughed violently. In three hours more there Avas difficulty of breathing, Avith increase of the cough. There was a sense of tightness at the lower part of the throat, and the pulse was hard. At times he said he could scarcely breathe. He died eleven hours after the accident. On inspection, there was congestion of the Avindpipe and bronchial tubes, Avith efliision of blood in the latter. The heart was tlaccid, and contained but little blood ; and the lining membrane of the heart and aorta Avas inflamed. The blood gave a slightly acid reaction Avith test paper. The windpipe Avas not examined. It is very probable the seat of mischief Avas in this organ, and that the deceased died from inflammatory effusion and enlargement of the parts about the opening of the Avindpipe. ('Lancet,' April 15, 1854, p. 430.) A similar accident occurred to Mr. Stewart and one of the janitors of an educational institution in Edinburgh in March 1803. A jar of nitric acid, Avhich he Avas carrying, fell on the floor and Avas broken. He and the janitor, instead of Avithdrawing from the spot, Aviped the floor, and attempted to save some of the acid. They thus inhaled the fumes Avhich Avere immediately diffused. Mr. Stewart returned home Tinconscious of the mischief Avhich had been done. After an hoxir or tAvo, difficulty of breathing came on, and in spite of every medical effort to save his life, he died in ten hours after the accident. The janitor suffered from similar symptoms, and died the day following. (' Chemical News,' March 14, 1863, p. 132.) It is probable that in these cases, there Avas great bronchial effusion leading to the entire obstruc- tion of respiration. The fumes of nitrous acid vapour, Avhich is generally associated with nitric acid, are of a very deadly kind. In the manufacture of gun-cotton acid A'apoiirs are evolved, Avhich, if respired, although they may produce no immediate ill effects, are liable to cause pneumonia and death. On one occasion, in preparing gun-cotton, I accidently inhaled the vapour, and suffered from severe constriction of the throat, tightness in the chest, and cough for more than a Aveek. Appearances after Death.—Supposing death to have taken place rapidly from the liquid acid, the foUoAving appearances may be met A\'ith. The skin of the mouth and lips Avill present A^arious shades of colour, from an orange- yelloAV to a broAvn ; it appears like the skin after a blister or burn, and is easily detached from the subjacent parts. YelloAv spots produced by the spilling of the acid may be found about the hands and neck. A yellow frothy licpiid escapes from the nose and mouth ; and the abdomen is often much distended. The membrane lining the mouth is sometimes Avhite, at others of a citron colour; the teeth are Avhite, but present a yelloAvish colour about the corona;. The pharynx and larynx ai-e much inflamed ; the latter is sometimes edematous. The lining membrane of the gullet is softened, and of a yelloAV or broAvn colour, easily detached, often in long folds. The trachea is more vascular than usual, and the lungs are congested. The most strongly marked changes are, hoAvever, seen in the stomach. When not perforated, this organ may be foiuid distended Avith gas, its mucous membrane partially inflamed, and covered by patches of a yellow, broAvn, or green colour, or it may be even black. This green colour is due to the action of the acid on the colouring matter of the bile ; but it must be remembered that a morbid state of the bile it.self may give a similar appearance to the mucous membrane in many cases of death from natural disease. There is occasionally inflam- mation of the peritoneum, and the stomach is glued to the surrounding organs. Its coats may be so much softened, as to break doAvn under the slightest


[235/1290 b21964944_0235.jp2]

171 FATAL DOSE. I'EKIOD OF DEATH. ANALYSIS. pi-essure. In the duodenum similar changes are found ; but in some cases the small intestines have presented no other appearance than that of slight redness. It might be supposed that the stomach would be in general perforated by this corrosive liquid ; but perforation has not been often observed. Tartra met with only two instances, and in one of these the person survived twenty, and in the other thirty hours. In giving this poison to rabbits, I have not found the stomach perforated, although the acid had evidently reached that organ, as its coats were stained of a deep yellow colour. In these experiments the non-perforation appeared to be due to the protective influence of the food with which the stomach was distended. In the few cases that are reported in English journals, it would appear that the stomach has not been perforat(!d : the poison had been swallowed soon after a meal, and its coats had tluis escaped the corrosive action of the acid. In the case above referred to (p. 109), Avhich proved fatal after the long period of six months, there was, at the intestinal end of the stomach, a distinct cicatrix with jjuckering and hardening of the surrounding mucous membrane, causing a slight contraction of the ])yloric orifice. The only other appearance consisted in some dark longitudinal lines on the posterior suri'ace of the lining membrane of the gullet. This had probably been caused by the acid. (' Lancet,' Nov. 24, 18G0, p. 510.) Quantity required to destroy Life.—The smallest quantity of this acid which I find reported to have destroyed life, is about two drachms. It was in the case of a boy, aged thirteen : he died in about thirty-six hours. But less than this quantity, even one drachm, would doubtless suffice to kill a child, and, rmder certain circumstances, an adixlt; for the fatal result depends on the extent of the mischief produced by this corrosive poison in the windpipe, gullet, and stomach. What is the largest dose of concentrated acid, from the effects of which a person has recovered, it is difficult to say ; since in most of the cases of recovery mentioned by authors, the quantity of the poison taken, was unknown. Period at ichich Death takes place.—Sobernheim relates a case of poisoning by nitric acid, which proved fatal in one hour and three quarters. (Op. cit. 402.) This I believe to be the most rapidly fatal instance on record, wliere the acid acted as a poison. The usual well-marked efiects were found in the gullet, stomach, and small intestines. In infants, however, life may be destroyed by this poison in a few minutes, should it happen to affect the larynx. The longest case is, perhaps, that recorded by Tartra, where a Avoman perished from exhaustion, produced by the secondaiy effects of the poison, eight mouths after haA'ing swallowed it. Chemical Analysis.—In the simple state.—This acid may be met with either concentrated or diluted. The concentrated acid varies in colour from a deep orange red to a light straw yellow\ It may be recognized, 1- By evolving acid fumes when exposed to the air or when heated. 2. By its staining organic matter yellow or brown, the colour being heightened and tiu-ned to a reddish tint by contact with caustic alkalies. 3. When mixed with a few copper cut- tings, it is rapidly decomposed, a deep red acid vapour is given off, and a greenish coloured solution of nitrate of copper is formed. Tin or mercury may be substituted for copper in this experiment. 4. The addition of gold-leaf and a few drops of hydrochloric acid. On warming the mixture, if nitric acid is present the gold is dissolved. Common aqua fortis (nitric acid) sometimes contains as impurity, a sufficiency of hydrochloric acid to dissolve gold-leaf by heat. In the diluted state. This acid is not precipitated like the sulphuric, by any common reagent, since all its alkaline combinations are soluble in water. 1. The liquid has a highly acid reaction, and on boiling it with some copper turnings, red fumes of nitrous acid vapour are given oft', unless the proportion of water is very great. At the same time, the liquid acquires a blue colour..


[236/1290 b21964944_0236.jp2]

172 CHEMICAL PROCESSES FOR NITRIC ACID. 2. A streak made on white paper with the dihited acid does not carbonize it when heated ; but a scarcely visible yellow stain is left. ^ 3. The liquid is neither precipitated by nitrate of baryta nor by nitrate of silver. These two last experiments give merely negative results: they serve to show that the sulphuric and hydrochloric acids are absent. In order to detect nitric acid, the liquid should be carefully neutralized by potash, and then evaporated slowly to obtain crystals. If the liquid contani nitric acid, these crystals will possess the fol- lowing characters: 1. They appear in the ibrm of lengthened fluted prisms, which neither effloresce nor deliquesce on exposvxre. One drop of the solution, evaporated spontaneously on glass, will suffice to yield distinct and well- formed prismatic crystals. This character distinguishes the nitrate of potash from a large number of salts. 2. When moistened with strong sulphuric acid, the powdered crystals slowly evolve a colourless acid va- pour. By this test, the nitrate is known i'vom every other deflagrating salt. 3. A portion of the powdered crystals should be placed in a small tube and mixed with their bulk of fine copper filings. The mass is then to be moistened with water, and a few drops of strong sul- phuric acid added. Either with or without the application of a gentle heat, a decomposition immediately ensues, by which red fumes of nitrous acid are evolved, recognizable by their colour, odour, and acid reaction. In operating on a small quantity of nitrate free from chloride, the crystals may be placed in a watch-glass and mixed with one or two drops of con- centrated sulphuric acid and a few copper filings. Invert over this another Avatch-glass containing a small slip of blue litmus-paper wetted, and a slip of starch-paper moistened with a solution of iodide of potassium. After a longer or shorter interval the litmus will be reddened, and the starch-paper will assume a blue-black colour. If the nitrate should be mixed with much chloride, then the power of dissolving leaf-gold on boiling the dry salt with strong hydrochloric acid, furnishes the best means of detection. 4. We add to the crystals a small portion of gold-leaf and hydrochloric acid; then boil for a few minutes. The gold will either wholly or entirely disappear if nitric acid or a nitrate is present. Its partial solution will be indicated by a dark purple colour on the addition of chloride of tin to the liqi;id after boiling. la liquids containing organic matter. Nitric acid may be administered in such liquids as tea, vinegar, or porter. In this case, besides the acid reaction, there will be a peculiar smell produced by the strong acid, when mixed with substances of an organic nature. The application of the usual tests may be here counteracted: thus, unless the quantity of nitric acid in the liquid is considerable, the orange-red fumes of nitrous acid are not evolved on boiling it with copper cuttings. If the liquid is viscid, this viscidity must be destroyed by dilution with water: and in all cases, if any solid or insoluble substances are present, as in the matters vomited, or contents of the stomach, it must be filtered, in order to separate the insoluble portions. This operation is com- monly very slow, and in place of filtration, the process of dialysis may be resorted to for separating the acid from the mucous and other contents of the stomach. If we succeed in procuring a clear acid liquor, the colour may be disregarded. After warming the acid, we should carefully neutralize it with a weak solution of carbonate of potash: it may then be concentrated by evaporation. Paper dipped into this liquid and dried, burns with deflagration, Crystals of Nitrate of Potash, magnified 30 diameters.


[237/1290 b21964944_0237.jp2]

IIYDROCIILOKIC OR MURIATIC ACID. and a few drops on a glass slide will yield crystals possessing those properties which have been described as characteristic of the compound of potash with nitric acid. The crystals so obtained may be coloured and impure : but this does not interfere with the action of the most important test for nitric acid, namely the mixture of copper filings and sulphuric acid. The crystals may, liowever, if necessary, be purified by Avashing them with ether or alcohol. These liquids do not dissolve the nitrate of potash, but will often serve to remove li-om it the organic matters by which it is coloured. When either the nitric acid, or the nitrate into which it has been converted, is mixed with common sjilt, the copper test cannot be employed. The gold test will in such a case furnish the best evidence. Hydrochloric acid with a small portion of gold-leaf may be added to the dried residue, and the mixture boiled. If nitric acid or a niti-ate is present, even in minute proportion, some portion of the gold will be dissolved, a fact demonstrable by the addition of chloride of tin. Nitric acid may be detected in stains on clothing, if recent, by simply boil- ing the stained cloth in Avater, with or without the addition of a small quan- tity of carbonate of potash. The carbonate nuist be vised when an acid liquid is not obtained by boiling the stained cloth in distilled water. Hydrochloric Acid. Muriatic Acid. This acid, which is also called Muriatic acid, and is popularly known under the name of Spirit of salt, is but seldom taken as a poison. In the few cases which have been hitherto observed, the symptoms and apj^earances have been similar to those caused by nitric acid. The following case of poisoning by this acid occurred in King's College Hospital, in May 1859. A Avoman, jet. sixty-three, swallowed half an ounce of concentrated hydrochloric acid. She was received into the hospital in three quarters of an hour. The prominent symptoms Avere burning pain in the throat and stomach, feeble pulse, cold and clammy skin, retching and vomiting of a broAvn matter streaked Avith blood and containing shreds of membrane. There Avas great exhaustion. The throat became swollen, the patient lost the poAver of swallowing, and died in eighteen houi-s. She retained her senses until the last. The appearances in the body Avere as folloAvs: the mucous membrane of the mouth and throat was white, softened, and destroyed in many places by the corrosive action of the acid. The membrane of the gullet Avas red and inflamed. The back part of the stomach near the pylorus Avas black, stripped of its mucous mem- brane (Avhich Avas generally softened), and marked with black lines. It was not perforated. ('Lancet,' July 16, 1859, p. 59.) In this case the smallest quantity of hydrochloric acid Avas taken which has as yet been knoAvn to prove flxtal. I have elsewhere related a case of poisoning by this acid (' Guy's Hosp. Rep.' Oct. 1850, p. 211) ; and for other cases in Avhich an ounce was taken and the persons recovered, see ' Lancet,' July 27, 1850, p. 113, and the 'Medical Gazette,' Dec. 28, 1849. For a more detailed account of poisoning by this acid, see ' On Poisons,' second edition, p. 289. Chemical Analysis.—In a concentrated state, hydrochloric acid evolves copious fumes. The pure acid is nearly colourless : the commercial acid is of a lemon yellow colour, and frequently contains iron, arsenic, and other impurities. When boiled Avith a small quantity of peroxide of manganese, chlorine is evolved. It does not dissolve gold-leaf until a few drops of nitric acid have been added to it, and the mixture is heated. In the diluted state, these properties are lost. It may then be recognized by the dense white precipitate Avhich it gives when a solution of nitrate of silver is added to it. This precipitate is insoluble in nitric acid: it acquires a purple and black colour if exposed to light, and Avhen heated, it melts without decomposition, forming a yellowish-coloured substance on cooling.


[238/1290 b21964944_0238.jp2]

POISONING BY OXALIC ACID. SYMPTOMS. 174 Hydrochloric acid, as well as alkaline chlorides, are natural constituents of. the fluids of the alimentary canal. The presence of local chemical changes in the thi-oat and stomach, Avould shoAV whether the acid had been taken as a: poison. If the acid is found only in small quantity, no inference of poisoning can be drawn unless there are distinct marks of its chemical action upon the tliroat and stomach. It darkens the blood like sulphuric acid, although it has not the same degree of carbonizing action on organic matter. CHAPTER 14. poisoning by vegetable acids. oxalic acid symptoms and effects appearances after death—chemical analysis—acid oxalate of potash or salt of sorrel. tartaric acid. acetic acid. vinegar. Oxalic Acid. Symj)toms.—If this poison is taken in a large dose, i. e. from half an ounce to an ounce of the crystals dissolved in water, a hot burning acid taste is ex- perienced during the act of swallowing it. This is accompanied by a similar sensation extending through the gullet to the stomach. There is sometimes a sense of constriction or suffocation : the countenance is livid and the surface of the skin soon becomes cold and clammy. Vomiting occurs either imme- diately or within a few minutes. Should the poison be diluted, there is merely a sensation of strong acidity, and vomiting may not occiir until after a quarter of an hour or twenty minutes. In some cases there has been little or no vomiting : Avhile in others, this symptom has been incessant until death. In a case which occurred to Dr. Page, in which an ounce of the acid was swal- lowed, the vomiting with pain in the stomach continued until the fifth day, when the man died suddenly. (' Lancet,' Nov. 24, 1860, p. 509.) In a case in which the poison was much diluted, vomiting did not occur for seven hours. (' Christison,' 221.) The vomited matters are highly acid, and have a greenish- brown or almost black colour ; they consist chiefly of mucus and altered blood. In one instance, reported by Dr. Geoghegan, they were colourless. (' Medical Gazette,' vol. 37, p. 792.) In another case, reported by Mr. Deane in the * Provincial Journal,' fluid blood of a bright arterial colour was vomited afler some hours. (June 25th, 1851, p. 344.) There is great pain and tenderness in the abdomen, with a burning sensation in the stomach. There are cold clammy perspirations and convulsions. In a case which occurred at Guy's Hospital, in May 1842, in which about two ounces of the poison had been sAvallowed, there was no pain. Violent vomiting and collapse were the chief symptoms. There is in general an entire prostration of strength, so that if the person is in the erect position, he falls; there is likewise unconsciousness of surrounding objects, and a kind of stupor, from which, however, the patient may be without difficulty roused. Owing to the severity of the pain, the legs are sometimes drawn up towards the abdomen. The pulse is small, irregular, and scarcely perceptible; there is a sensation of numbness in the extremities, and the respiration, shortly before death, is spasmodic. The inspirations are deep, and a long interval elapses between them. Such are the symptoms commonly observed in a rapidly fatal case. Should the patient survive the first effects of the poison, the followino- symptoms may appear: there is soreness of the mouth, constriction and burn- ing pain in the throat Avith pain in swallowing, tenderness in the abdomen, and irritability of the stomach, so that there is frequent vomiting, accompanied by purging. The tongue is swollen, and there is great thirst. The patient may slowly recover from these symptoms. In a case related by Mr. Edwards


[239/1290 b21964944_0239.jp2]

OXALIC ACID. APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH. 175 to the Westminster Medical Society, the patient, a female, lost her voice for eight days. Another case has been reported by Mr. T. W. Bradley, from which it may be inferred that a loss of voice may result from a direct effect of oxalic acid on the nervous system. A man swallowed a quarter of an ounce of the acid, and suffered from the usual symptoms in a severe form. In about nine hours his voice, although naturally deep, had become low and feeble. This weakness of voice remained lor more that a month, and its natural strength had not returned even after the lapse of nine weeks. During tlui first month there was numbness, with tingling of the legs, (' Med. Times,' Sept. 14, 1850, p. 292.) The occurrence of this sensation of numbness, and its persistence for so long a period after recovery from the symptoms of ii-ri- tation, clearly point to a remote effect on the nervous system. Spasmodic twitchings of the muscles of the face and extremities have also been observed in some instances, (See 'Lancet,' March 22, 1851, p. 329.) Appearances after Death.—The mucous membrane of the tongue, mouth, throat, and gullet, is commonly white, as if bleached, but it is sometimes coated Avith a portion of the brown mucous matter discharged from the stomach. This latter organ contains a dark brown mucous liquid, often acid, and having almost a gelatinous consistency. On removing the contents, the mucous membrane will be seen pale and softened, without always presenting marks of inflammation or abrasion, if death has taken place rapidly. This membrane is white, solt, and brittle, easily raised by the scalpel, and presents the appear- ance which we might suppose it would assume after having been for some time boiled in water. The small vessels are seen ramifying over the surface, filled witli dark-colovired blood, apparently solidified Avithin them. The lining membrane of the gullet presents the same characters. It is pale, and appears as if it had been boiled in water, or digested in alcohol; it has been found strongly raised in longitudinal folds, interrupted by patclies where the mem- brane has become abraded. In a case which was fatal in eight hours, the tongue was covered with white specks; the gullet was not infiamed, but the stomach was extensively destroyed, and had a gangrenous appearance. Portions of the mucous membrane were detached, exposing the muscular coat. With respect to the intestines, the upper portion may be found inflamed; but, imless the case is protracted, the appearances in the bowels are not strongly marked. In a well-marked instance of poisoning by this acid, however, which is re- corded by Dr. Hildebrand, the mucous or lining membi ane of the stomach and duodenum was much reddened, although the patient, a girl of eighteen, died in three quarters of an hour after taking one ounce of the acid, by mis- take for Epsom salts. (Casper's ' Vierteljshrschrift,' 1853, 3 B. 2 H. page 25G.) In a case of poisoning in which two ounces of the acid had been taken, and death was rapid, the coats of the stomach presented almost the blackened appearance produced by sulphuric acid, owing to the colour of the altered blood spread over them. In protracted cases, the gullet, stomach, and intes- tines have been foimd more or less congested or infiamed. In a case in which an ounce was swalloAved, and death occurred on the fifth day,j;he stomach was slightly congested and contained a bloody fluid, but the mucous membrane was entire. (' Lancet,' Nov. 24, 18G0, p. 509.) I am indebted to Mr. Welch for the following case :—A woman aged twenty-eight, swallowed three drachms of the crystallized acid. She Avas found quite dead in one hour afterwards. On examining the body, both lungs were observed to be extensively congested, and the heart and large vessels ■were full of dark-coloured blood. The stomach contained about three quartei-s of a pint of a dark-broAvn fluid, and its lining membrane Avas generally red- dened.. The other organs, except the brain, Avere healthy, and this presented appearances indicative of long-standing disease. Tliis case is remarkable from


[240/1290 b21964944_0240.jp2]

176 OXALIC ACID. APrEARANCES. FATAL DOSE. the smallness of the dose, the rapidity of death, and the early production of •a well-muriked redness of tlie mucous membrane of the stomach. The ^ dis- •eased state of the body may have tended to accelei-ate death from the poison. In one instance the larynx was found filled with frothy mucus, and the left :Kide of the heart and the lungs Avere gorged Avith dark-coloured fluid blood. In another, the appearances of sanguineous apoplexy Avere found in the braui. -A perKon fell dead after retching violently. Apoplexy was supposed to be the cause of death. On an inspection of the body, it Avas found that a large •clot of "l^lood Avas effused on the brain, and this appeared to account for death satisfactorily'. But Avhni the stomach Avas examined, oxalic acid was detected ■in it. This poison had been taken and had produced its usual effects. The ■deceased liad taken it Avith suicidal intention, and the violent vomiting Avhich iit caused had led to death by apoplexy from effusion of blood. (' Lancet,' 1, .18G3, p. 47.) Without a proper chemical investigation, it is obvious that the ireal -.eanse of death Avould have been in this instance overlooked. In a fcAV ■ cases there have been scarcely any morbid appearances produced by this poison. It is Avorthy of remark that the glairy contents of the stomach do not ahvays iindicate strong acidity until after they have been boiled in Avater. Oxalic .•acid does not appear to have a strongly corrosive action on the stomach, like ithat possessed by the mineral acids. It is therefore rare to hear of the coats •of the organ being perforated by it. In many exjieriments on animals, and in :some fcAV obserA^ations on the human subject, I have found nothing to bear ■out the view that perforation is a common effect of the action of this poison. 'The acid undoubtedly renders the mucous coat soft and brittle, and perfora- tion of the coats may occur either during life or after death as a result of its •chemical action. Dr. Wood has recorded the case of a female, jet. tAventy- seven, found dead, Avhose death had been obviously caused by oxalic acid, but the quantity taken, and the duration of the case, Avcre unknoAvn. The :stomach presented, at its upper and fore part near the cardiac oj)ening, an irregular aperture of a size to admit the point of the finger. From this, a dark gelatinous-looking matter, resembling coffee-grounds, Avas escaping in abund- ance. The perforation Avas enlarged during the removal, and presented the appearance of tAvo large apertures separated by a narroAV band. The stomach contained a bloody fluid, in which oxalic acid was detected, and the mucous membrane had an eroded appearance. The small intestines (jejunum and ileum) Avere similarly affected. Quantity required to destroy Life.—The smallest quantity of this poison Avhich has been knoAvn to destroy life is one drachm (sixty grains). The boy, set. sixteen, was a patient of Dr. Barker's, of Bedfoi-d. He took the poison in a solid form, and Avas found in about an hour insensible, pulseless, and his jaAvs spasmodically closed. He had vomited some bloody matter : his tongue and lips Avere imusually pale, but there Avas no excoriation. He died in eight hours. ('Lancet,' Dec. 1, 1855.) In Mr. Welch's case (supra) three drachms destroyed life in an hour. Tavo cases occurred at Guy's Hospital, in each of ■which half an ounce of oxalic acid had been SAvalloAved. Active treatment was adopted, and both patients recovered. When the dose is upAvards of half an ounce, death is commonly the result; but one of my pu^^ils informed me of a case in which a man recovered afler haAdng taken an ounce of crystal- lised oxalic acid. Dr. Brush, of Dublin, has communicated to the 'Lancet' a case in which recovery took place after a similar dose of the poison had been taken. (See also a case by Mr. Alison in the same journal, Nov. 2, 1850, p. 502.) The acid Avas in this instance taken by mistake for Epsom salts. Period at which Death takes place.—Similar quantities of this poisou do not destroy life Avithin the same period of time. lu tAvo cases, in Avhich about


[241/1290 b21964944_0241.jp2]

OXALIC ACID. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS IN A PURE STATE. 177 two ounces of the acid were respectively taken, one man died in twenty minutes—the other in three-quarters of an hour. Dr. Christison mentions an instance in which an ounce killed a girl in thirty minutes; and another in which the same quantity destroyed liie in ten mimites; but in a third case death did not occur until the fifth day. The late Dr. Ogilvy, of Coventry, has reported a case of poisoning by oxalic acid, in which it is probable that death took place within three minutes after the poison had been swallowed. The sister of the deceased had been absent from the room about that period, and on her return found her dying. The quantity of poison taken could not be determined. When the do.se of oxalic acid is half an ounce and upwards, death commonly takes place in an hour. There are, it must be admitted, numerous exceptions to this rapidity of action. Dr. Christison reports two cases, which did not prove fatal for thirteen hours; and in an instance that occurred to Mr. Fraser, in which half an ounce was taken, the individual died from the secondary effects in a state of perfect exhaustion, twenty-three days after taking the poison. Chemical Analysis. In the simple state.—This acid may be met with, either as a solid, or in solution in water. Solid oxalic acid : It crystallizes in long slender prisms, which, when perfect, are tour-sided. In this respect it differs £"om other common acids, mineral and vegetable. The crystals are unchangeable in air; they arc soluble in water and alcohol, forming strongly acid solutions. When heated on platinum foil they melt, and are entirely dissipated without combustion and without being carbonized. Heated in a close tube, they melt, and the vapour is condensed as a white crystalline sub- limate in a cold part of the tube. There should be no residue whatever if the acid is pure : but the commercial acid generally leaves a slight residue of fixed impurity. By this effect of heat, oxalic acid is easily distinguished from those crystalline salts for which it has been sometimes fatally mistaken, namely, the suljjhates of magnesia and zinc. These leave white residues in the form of anhydrous salts. Tests.—1. Nitrate of silver.—When added to a solution of oxalic acid, it produces an abundant white precipitate of oxalate of silver. A solution con- taining so small a quantity of oxalic acid as not to redden litmus-paper, is affected by this test; but when the quantity of poison is small, it Avould be always advisable to concentrate the liquid by evaporation before applying it. The oxalate of silver is identified by the following properties: 1. It is com- pletely dissolved by cold nitric acid. If collected on a filter, thoroughly dried, and heated on thin platinmn foil, it is entirely dissipated in a white vapour with a slight detonation. When the oxalate is in small quantity, this detona- tion may be observed in detached particles on burning the filter previously well dried. 2. Sulphate of lime. A solution of oxalic acid is precipitated white by lime water and all the salts of lime. Lime water is itself objection- able as a test, because it is precipitated Avhite by several other acids. The Sixlt of lime, which, as a test, is open to the least objection, is the sulphate. As this is not a very soluble salt, its solution must be added in rather large quantity to the suspected acid poisonous liquid. A white precipitate of oxalate of lime is slowly formed. This precipitate should possess the following pro- perties:— 1. It ought to be immediately dissolved by nitric or hydrochloric acid. 2. It ought not to be dissolved by the tartaric, acetic, or any vegetable acid. In liquids containing Organic Matter.—The process is the same, whether it N Crystals of Oxalic Acid, magnified 30 diameters.


[242/1290 b21964944_0242.jp2]

178 OXALIC ACID. PROCESSES IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS. is applied to liquids in which the poison is administered, or to the matters vomited, or, lastly, to the contents of the stomach. This poison readily com- bines with albumen and gelatine, "and it is not liable to be decomposed or precipitated by these or any other organic substances: it is, therefore, com- monly found in solution in the liquid portion, which Avill then be more or less acid. Sulphate of copper produces a greenish white precipitate in the liquid, if the oxalic acid is in large quantity. Should the liquid be very acid, we must filter it to separate any insoluble matters; should it not be very acid, the Avhole may be boiled, if necessary, with distilled water, before filtration is performed. On no account are the tests for oxalic acid to be employed in liquids containing organic matter, since nitrate of silver is easily precipitated by such matters, although none of the poison is present. Should the acid liquid be highly coloured, it may be first boiled for some time Avith Avell- washed animal charcoal. After this it may be filtered and concentrated by evaporation. To the filtered liquid, acidulated with acetic acid, acetate of lead should be added until there is no further precipitation ; and the white precipitate formed, collected and washed. If any oxalic acid was present in the liquid, it would exist in this precipitate under the form of oxalate of lead. The following plan may be adopted for separating oxalic acid from the oxalate of lead:—Diffuse the precipitate in water, and pass into the liquid, for about half an hour, a current of sulphuretted hydrogen gas, taking care that the gas comes in contact with every portion of the precipitate. Black sulphide of lead will be precipitated : and with it commonly the greater part of the organic matter, which may have been mixed Avith the oxalate of lead. Filter, to separate the sulphide of lead; the filtered liquid may be clear and highly acid. Concentrate by evaporation; the sulphuretted hydrogen dissolved in the liquid is thereby expelled, and oxalic acid may be ultimately obtained crystallized by slow evaporation in a Avatch-glass or on a glass-slide, for micro- scopical observation. If there was no oxalic acid in the precipitate, no crystals will be procured by evaporation. If crystals are obtained, they must be dis- solved in water, and tested in the manner above directed. Should the organic liquid contain sulphuric acid or sulphates, these should be separated before precipitation by lead is resorted to. As oxalic acid is very soluble in alcohol, this liquid may be occasionally employed for separating it from the contents of the stomach and from many organic compounds. Crystals may be obtained from the alcoholic solution, and these may be purified and tested by the methods already described. In some cases the process of dialysis may be resorted to for separating this acid from starch, albumen, gelatin, mucus, and other organic compounds which give viscidity to water, and Avhich are present in the stomach at the time of death. In cases of poisoning, the residuary quantity found in the stomach is generally small. In one instance, in wdiich about an ounce and a half had been taken, and the person died in two hours, I found only thirteen grains. This is owinc to the ejection of the greater portion by vomiting. In Reg. v. Cochrane (Liverpool Summer Assizes, 1857), in which it was charged that two children, aged six and four years respectively, had been wilfully poisoned by their mother, it was stated by the medical witness, Dr. Edwards, that he found forty-two grains of oxalic acid in the stomach of the elder, and twenty grains in that of the younger child. It was not clearly established when or how this large quantity of poison could have been wilfully administered to the children, and the prisoner was acquitted. Acid Oxalate of Potash, or Salt of Sorrel. Symptoms and Effects.—The poisonous effects of this salt entirely depend on the oxahc acid which it contains. It is much used for the purpose of bleachmg straw and removing ink-stains, being sold under the name oi


[243/1290 b21964944_0243.jp2]

SALT OF SORREL OR ACID OXALATE OF POTASH. 179 essential salt of lemons. Its poisonous properties are not generally known, or no doubt it would be frequently substituted for oxalic acid. Out of three cases of poisoning by this substance, two proved fatal, while in the other the patient recovered. In the case of recovery, a young lady, aged twenty, swallowed an ounce of the salt dissolved in warm water. She was not seen by any one for an hour and a half: she was then found on the floor, faint and exhausted, having previously vomited considerably. There was great depres- sion, the skin cold and clammy, the pulse feeble, and there was a scalding sensation in the throat and stomach. There was also continued shivering. Proper medical treatment was adopted, and she recovered in tv/o days, still suffering from debility and great irritation of the stomach. During the state of depression, it was remarked that the conjunctivae (membranes of the eyes) were much injected, and the pupils dilated. There was also great dimness of vision. (' Med. Gaz.' vol. 27, p. 480.) In another case, two hundred and twenty-five grains were taken (about half an ounce). Bicarbonate of soda was given as an antidote, and the patient completely recovered. ('Med. Times and Gazette,' Feb. 12, 1859.) The recovery mitst have taken place in spite of the antidote, for the oxalate • of soda is just as poisonous as the oxalate of potash. For a third case of recovery, see the same journal, Oct. 15, 1859, p. 378. This salt destroys life almost as rapidly as oxalic acid itself: and in the symptoms which it produces, it closely resembles that poison. In one case, half an ounce killed an adult in so short a time as eight minutes ; but probably the fatal effects were in this instance accelerated by the debilitated state of the person who took it. In another case, reported by M. Chevallier, death took place in ten minutes. (' Ann. d'Hyg.' 1850, vol. 1, p. 162.) Chemical Analysis.—It is not very soluble in cold water, but its solution may be readily mistaken for that of oxalic acid. 1st, it has an acid reaction; and 2nd, it is precipitated by nitrate of silver and sulphate of lime, like oxalic acid : but with the latter test the preci- pitation is much more copious. It is distinguished from oxalic acid. 1. By its crystals, which when slowly produced on a glass slide assume the shape of rhombic prisms, sometimes grouped in a plumose form ; and 2. By heating a portion on platinum foil. While oxalic acid is volatile, the binoxalate leaves an ash, which, when suffi- ciently calcined, is white and alkaline ; it may be proved to contain carbonate of potash by its dis- crystals of Acid Oxalate of Potash, solving with effervescence in diluted nitric acid, magnified 30 diameters, and forming nitrate of potash. In some instances this poisonous salt has been supplied by mistake for cream of tartar, and has caused death. Cream of tartar, or acid tartrate of potash, leaves a black alkaline residue when calcined. Its solution is less acid than that of the salt of sorrel. It is not precipitated by the nitrate of silver or sulphate of lime. The different action of the two salts on writing ink affords a simple means of identification. The binoxalate of potash imme- diately discharges the colour of ink when Avarmed, while the acid tartrate does not possess this property. Tartaric Acid. Srjmptoms and Appearances.—Tartaric acid is not commonly regarded as a poison; but one case has occurred, in which there was no doubt that it acted as an irritant, and destroyed life. The case referred to, was N 2


[244/1290 b21964944_0244.jp2]

TARTARIC AND ACETIC ACIDS. VINEGAR. 180 the subject of a trial for manslaughter at the Central Criminal Court {Reg. v. Watkina), in January, 1845. The accused gave to the deceased, a man aged twenty-four, one ounce of tartaric acid instead of aperient salts. The deceased swallowed the whole dissolved in half a pint of warm water; he immediately exclaimed that he Avas poisoned ; he complained of havmg a burning sensation in his throat and stomach, as though he had drunk oil of vitriol, and that he could compare it to nothing but being all on fire. Soda and magnesia were administered with diluent drinks. Vomiting set in, and continued until death, which took place nine days afterwards. On in- spection, nearly the whole of the alimentary canal was found highly inflamed. The accused admitted that he had made a mistake, and tartai-ic acid was found in the dregs of the cup. The jury acquitted the prisoner. Another case of poisoning by this acid, with a report of the results of analysis, has been pub- lished by M. Devergie. ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1851, vol. 2, p. 432.) This case gave rise to a controversy between the late M. Orfila and M. Devergie, the points in dispute relating chiefly to the processes for the detection of the acid in the stomach and tissues. (See 'Ann. d'Hyg.' 1852, vol. 1, jjp. 199, 382, and vol. 2, p. 230.) Acetic Acid. This acid has been generally excluded fi-om the class of poisons. Common Vinegar, which contains only five per cent, of acetic acid, has been often taken in large doses without injurioits consequences. From the experiments per- formed by Orfila on dogs, and from one case Avhich he reports as having oc- curred in the human subject, acetic acid, when concentrated, appears to exert an irritant action on the body. ('Annales d'Hygiene,' 1831, vol. 2, p. 159 : also ' Toxicologic,' vol. 2, p. 198.) This is not more than we might have ex- pected, seeing that the concentrated acid is highly corrosive. In the case referred to, the deceased, a female aged nineteen, Avas foimd dying on the highway. She suffered from convulsions, complained of pain in the stomach, and died in a short time. On inspection, the stomach Avas found neither softened nor corroded, but its mucous membrane near the pylorus Avas almost black. The mucous glands Avere prominent, and the vessels Avere filled Avith dark coagulated blood. Vinegar, Avhich may be regarded as an organic mixture containing a small proportion of acetic acid, may be examined by distilling a portion, and testing the distilled liquid for the acid. Vinegar, as it exists in commerce, ahvays contains a small quantity of sulphuric acid, and occasionally traces of arsenic, lead, and copper. In general it is easily recognized by its odour. Pelletan observed in the case of a child, that the abuse of vinegar led to a thinning of the mucous membrane of the stomach ; and Landerer remarked that the milk of a Avet-nurse Avho had been in the habit of taking large quantities of the Vinegar of Roses, became thin, very acid, and deficient in casein and oil. The infimt Avhich she Avas suckling gradually Avasted and died, and the Avoman herself suffered severely. (Heller's 'Archiv.' 1847, 2 H. S. 185.) CHAPTER 15. poisoning by the alkalies.—potash, soda, and their carbonates symptoais fatal effects of the carbonate of potash appearances after death ammonia and its carbonate (sal volatile)—chemical analysis. Potash and Soda. Symptoms.—The symptoms produced by potash and soda, A\'hen taken in laro-e doses, are so similar that one description Avill serve for both. Cases of alka- line poisoning are, however, rare, and have been, generally, the result of


[245/1290 b21964944_0245.jp2]

181 POISOXIXG BY rOTASH AND SODA. accident. The most common form in wliich these poisons are met with, is in tlie state of pearlash (carbonate of potash) and soap-lees (carbonate of soda). The patient experiences, during the act of swallowing, an acrid caustic taste, owing to the alkaline liquid, if sufficiently concentrated, excoriating the mucous membrane. There is a sensiition-of burning heat in the throat, ex- tending down the gullet to the stomach. Vomiting is not always observed ; but when it does occur, the vomited matters are sometimes mixed with blood of a dark brown colour, and with detached portions of mucous membi-ane: this effect depending on the degree of causticity in the liquid swallowed. The surface is cold and clammy : there is purging, with severe pain in the abdomen, resembling colic. The pulse is quick and feeble. In the course of a short time, the lips, tongue, and throat become swollen, soft, and red. Appearances after Death.—In recent cases there are marks of the local ac- tion of the poison on the mucous membrane of the mouth, throat, and gullet. This membrane has been found softened, detached, and inflamed in patches of a deep chocolate colour, sometimes almost black. A similar appearance has been met with in the mucous membrane of the larynx and windpipe. The stomach has had its mucous surface eroded in patches, and there has been ])artial inflammation. In one instance, as a result of the action of soda, I found it puckered and blackened. Period of Death.—The most rapidly fatal case which I have found reported is that of a boy, who died in three hours after swallowing three ounces of a strong solution of carbonate of potash. In a case which occurred in 1835, a child, aged three years, took a small quantity of concentrated solution of pearl- ash, which had deliquesced, and died in twenty-four hours. Death was caused in this instance by the inflammation induced in the larynx, causing suffocation. In this respect, the caustic alkalies may destroy life rapidly, like the mineral acids. But death may be also a slow result of these poisons. Thus in an in- stance which was communicated to me, a lady swallowed, by mistake, one ounce and a half of the common solution of potash of the shops, which con- tains about five per cent, of caustic alkali. She recovered from the first symptoms of irritation, but died seven weeks afterwards, from pure exhaus- tion, becoming greatly emaciated before her death. The alkali had probably de- stroyed the lining membrane of the stomach, and had thus impaired digestion. Carbonates.—Dr. Barclay has reported a case of poisoning by potash, which furnishes a good illustration of the after-effects and appearances caused by this poison. A Avoman, aged forty-four, was admitted into St. Geoi-ge's Hospital, May 2, 1853, about six hours and a half after she had swallowed a quantity of American potash, probably a saturated solution of carbonate of potash (American pearlash). She had vomited immediately after taking it. The mouth and throat Avere much corroded. There was burning pain in the throat and gullet, extending downAvards to the stomach ; but there Avas no •tenderness on pressure. Tavo days after her admission, there Avas a little vomiting. The mucous membrane, as far as it could be seen, Avas destroyed; there Avas difficulty of SAvallowing, and occasionally pain after food had entered the stomach. In about a month, there Avas frequent vomiting, Avith pain on pressure, and constipation ; when food or medicine was taken, there Avas much pain in the stomach, and in a short time the food Avas ejected. As the case progressed, nothing could be retained on the stomach, and shortly before death the patient Avas supported only by nutritive injections. She died from starva- tion on the 8th July, about two months after taking the alkali. On inspection, the loAver part of the gullet Avas found much contracted, the lining membrane entirely destroyed, and the muscular coat exposed. The external coats were much thickened. The gullet end of the stomach, where the ulceration ceased, Avas considerably contracted. At the intestinal end, the mucous lining pre- sented a large and dense cicatrix, obstructing all conmiunication Avith the


[246/1290 b21964944_0246.jp2]

182 CHRONIC POISONING BY CARBONATES OF POTASH AND SODA. small intestines, except by an orifice no larger than a probe. The intervening portion of the stomach was healthy, as were also the large and small intestines. (' Med. Times and Gazette,' Nov. 26, 1853, p. 554.) In July, 1863, a case of poisoning by potash was the subject of an inquest in London. Orfila refers to two cases of poisoning by carbonate of potash, in each of Avhich half an ounce of this substance was taken by mistake for aperient salts. The patients, two young men, recovered from the first effects, but ultimately died : the one three months, and the other foiu- months, after the poison had been taken. The secondary fatal effects appear to have been due to constant purging, great iiTitability of the stomach leading to incessant vomiting, and loss of the functions of this organ from the destruction of the lining membrane, with stricture, either of the gullet or of the apertures of the stomach,—either of which causes might prove fatal at almost any period. A fatal case of stricture, produced by soap-lees after the lapse of two years and three months, is reported by Dr. Basham ('Lancet,' March 2,1850). The con- stant use of the alkalies or of their carbonates appears to be productive of latent mischief: yet the quantity which may be sometimes taken in divided doses without destroying life is enormous. Dr. Tunstall, of Bath, relates the case of a man who, for eighteen years, had been in the habit of taking bicarbonate of soda to remove dyspepsia. It is stated that for sixteen years he took two ounces of the bicarbonate daily ! The man died suddenly, and on examining the stomach it was found to be greatly distended and extensively diseased,— conditions which were referred by Dr. Tunstall to the action of the carbonate of soda. (' Med. Times,' Nov. 30, 1850, p. 564.) The quantity of any of these alkaline poisons required to destroy life isunknoAvn. The fatal effects depend rather on the degree of concentration of the liquid, than on the absolute quan- tity of alkali present. Chemical Analysis.—Solutions of Potash and Soda have a strongly alkaline reaction; they are distinguished from those of their respective carbonates by giving brown precipitates with a solution of nitrate of silver. The Caubo- the other hand, yield a whitish-yellow precipitate. Potash NATES, on IS known fi-om Soda by the following characters: — 1. Its solution, when not too much diluted with water, is precipitated of a canary-yellow colour by per- chloride of platinum. 2. It is precipitated in granular white crystals, on adding the alkaline liquid gradually to a strong solution of tartaric acid, containing a small quantity of alcohol, and occasionally stir- ring the mixture. Soda is not precipitated by either of these tests, which will serve equally to distinguish the salts of potash fi-om those of soda, if we except the acid oxalate and acid tartrate of potash : these, from being but little soluble in water, are not precipitated. 3. If we neix- tralize the two alkalies by diluted nitric acid, and crystallize the liquid on a slip of glass, . should the alkali be potash, the crystals will havft the form of long slender fluted prisms (p. 172) ; if soda, of rhombic plates. 4. Potash and its salts are known by their giving a reddish violet colour, while soda and its salts give a bright yellow colour to the colourless flame of alcohol. In liquids containing Organic Matter.—Such liquids are frothy; they possess an alkahne reaction, a peculiar alkaline odour, and are soapy to the feel. The organic liquid may be evaporated to dryness, then heated in a capsule to ch? the animal and vegetable matter, and the alkali will be recovered from it state of carbonate, by digesting the residuary ash in distilled water. Crj-stals of Nitrate of Soda, magnified 30 diameters. ar in a


[247/1290 b21964944_0247.jp2]

SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES IN POISONING BY AMMONIA. 183 Ammonia. Spirit of Hartshorn. The vapour of strong ammonia is poisonous. It may destroy life by pro- ducing violent inflammation of the larynx, or of the lungs and air passages. It is often injudiciously employed to rouse persons from a fit. A case is on record of an epileptic having died under all the symptoms of croup, two days after the application of strong ammonia to the nostrils. This had been em- ployed to rouse him from a fit. A singular case of recovery from the poi- sonous effects of this vapour, by Dr. Sanchard, is reported in the 'Annales d'Hygiene' (Janvier 1841). Symptoms and Appearances.—The strong solution of ammonia produces symptoms similar to those described in speaking of potash. The only dif- ference observed is, that the sense of heat and burning pain in the throat, gullet, and stomach, is much greater. Cases of this form of poisoning are rare. Dr. Sanchard relates an instance that occurred in France, in which a boy, only six years old, poisoned his younger sister by pouring several tea- spoonfuls of a strong solution of ammonia down her throat. In one case a strong dose of the solution killed a man in four minutesby causing suffocation (Christison, 167): and another case is referred to in the 'Jour- nal de Pharmacie' (Oct. 1846, p. 285), in which from one to two drachms of solution of ammonia, unknowingly administered, caused death. There was violent vomiting, with bloody purging; and, on inspection, blood Avas found effused in the intestines. There was also a remarkably fluid state of the blood in the body. In another instance, a man walked into a druggist's shop, and asked for a small quantity of ammonia to take spots ovit of his clothes. The druggist poured about a teaspoonful and a half into a glass. The man sud- denly swallowed it, and fell instantly to the ground. He soon afterwards died, complaining of the most excruciating pain. ('Journal de Chimie Medi- cale,' 1845, p. 531.) A similar case occurred at Halifax in April 1857: a man swallowed a large dose of ammonia, and died in a quarter of an hour. In other cases, in spite of a large dose, death has taken place slowly. Dr. Potain met with an instance in which a man swallowed upwards of three ounces of the commercial solution of ammonia, and he did not die fi-om the effects until the eleventh day. ('Journal de Chimie Medicale,' 1862, pp. 311 and 474.) Serious injury to the organs of respiration is sometimes the result of the action of this poison, as in the following case, which was referred to me for examination by my colleague, Mr. Hilton, in May, 1857. A gentleman liable to attacks of fainting, died in three days, after swallowing a quantity of a liquid administered to him by his son. This liquid, which was at the time believed to be sal volatile, was, in fact, a strong solution of ammonia. The deceased complained immediately of a sensation of choking and strangling in the act of vomiting. Symptoms of difficulty of breathing set in, with other signs of irritation in the throat and stomach. The mucous membrane of the mouth and throat was corroded and dissolved: and it was evident that the liquid had caused great local irritation. The difficulty of breathing was such as to threaten suffocation, and at one time it was thought that an operation must be resorted to. The state of the patient, however, precluded its per- formance, and he died on the third day. On inspection, the viscera presented strong marks of corrosion. The covering of the tongue was softened, and had peeled off; the lining membrane of the air-passages was softened and covered with layers of false membrane, the result of inflammation, and the larger bron- chial tubes were completely obstructed by casts or cylinders of this membrane. The lining membrane of the gullet was softened, and at the lower part, near its junction with the stomach, the tube was completely dissolved and destroyed. There was an aperture in the stomach in its anterior wall, about one inch


[248/1290 b21964944_0248.jp2]

rOISONlNG BY AMMONIA. 184 and a half in diameter : the edges Avere soft, ragged, and blackened, present- ing an appearance of solution. The contents^ of the stomach had escaped. On the inside, the vessels were injected with dark-coloitred blood, and there were numerous small eifusions of blood in various parts of the mucous mem- brane. The coats were thinned and softened at the seat of the aperture. The blackened and congested appearance somewhat resembled that which is seen in poisoning by sulphuric or oxalic acid. The mucous matter on the coats of the stomach was feebly acid. No poison of any kind was found in the layer of mucous or in the coats. There was not in any part the slightest trace oi ammonia, the poison which had caused the mischief. The deceased had lived three days: remedies had been used, and eveiy trace of ammonia had disap- peared. The immediate cause of death was an obstruction of the air tubes, as a result of inflammation, caused by the local irritant action of the poison. It was quite obvious that a quantity of the liquid had entered the Avindpipe. 'J'he perforation of the stomach had probably taken place shortly before death, or there would have been marks of peritonitis. The injury to the stomach and gullet would have been sufficient to cause death, even supposing that the li([uid had not penetrated to the lungs. Dr. Patterson met Avith a case in Avliich a man, ajt. 40, swalloAved an oimce of spirit of hartshorn. He ejected the liquid almost immediately, and complained of an intense burning pain and feeling of suffocation. None of it, he thought, had reached the stomach. Dr. Patterson saw him in two hours; his countenance Avasthen suffused and anxious, the lips Avere livid, breathing difficult, extremities cold, pulse 100, the inside of the mouth and throat was raAv and fiery-looking. He complained of pain in the situation of the larynx and under the lefl ear. The larynx Avas opened to relieve the breathing, but the relief Avas only temporary. He vomited blood, and before death suffered from great difficulty of swalloAving. He died in nine- teen days after taking the poison, obviously from the local injury done to the parts about the larynx. (' Ed. Med. Join-.' 1857, vol. 2, p. 230.) Mr. Tyerman communicated to me the particulars of a case Avhich occurred in Nov. 1858, in Avhich a lunatic, set. 62, swalloAved about two fluid ounces of compound camphor liniment. The patient inmiediately complained of great heat in the stomach ; vomiting Avas induced by giving to him Avarm Avater. The uvula, throat, and gullet Avere so intensely inflamed that he lost all poAver of swalloAving ; and the efforts to sAvalloAv liquids produced violent retching. The symptoms gradually abated, and the man recovered in four days. In this case the quantity of ammonia swallowed Avas small, amounting to about tAvo and a half drachms, diluted Avith about six times the quantity of rectified spirit. One of my pupils, Mr. Gill, comnninicated to me a case of the poisoning of an infant, only four and a half days old, by a small quantity of this liniment. The case occurred in Sept. 18G8. Mr. Gill saAv the infant about half an hour after the liquid had been taken ; it Avas then screaming in a suppressed manner, as if the act increased the pain : the hands Avere tightly clenched ; the skin Avas pale and covered Avith a cold perspiration : the mucous membrane of the lips Avas blistered, and that of the mouth and tongue was Avhite. A yelloAvish froth escaped from the mouth and nostrils ; breathing Avas painful, and the pulse impei-ceptible. In about tAvo hours the infant appeared better, but at intervals it suddenly started and screamed, as if from sudden pain. In six hours it continued much in the same state, and SAvalloAving was painful. In seventeen hours the skin Avas moist and cool: it had had a natural motion, and had been in a drowsy state during the night. After tAventy-four hours the infant Avas nuich Aveaker; the limbs Avere cold, and the breathing Avas feebly performed. It became droAvsy, and died thirty-two hours after taking tl.e poison. There Avas an inquest, but no inspection of the body. A question of importance arose in reference to the case : namely, Avhether the mother or a child, tAvo


[249/1290 b21964944_0249.jp2]

EFFECTS PRODUCED BY CARBONATE OF AMMONIA. 185 years of age, administered the poison to the deceased infant. The mother stated that tliis child was playing with the bottle of embrocation on the bed, on which her infant was lying. She left the room for a short time, and on her return she gave the infant a teaspoonful of food which she had previously prepared for it. She was sure the infant swallowed part of the food ; but as soon as the food was taken, it screamed violently and struggled for its breath, and then she perceived the food to amell strongly of the embrocation. As from the nature of this irritant compound the symptoms could not be suspended, it is clear that the mother either consciously or unconsciously gave the poison to her infant. On the latter supposition, it must have been placed in the food which was on a chair near to the bed by the child of two years, diiring her absence ; but in this case it is remarkable that she did not per- ceive the odour until after she had poured the liquid into the mouth of the infant. The quantity swallowed was unknown. In the ' Medical Times and Gazette' for May 2G, 1855, there are two cases reported, in which children were poisoned by swallowing a liniment of ammonia and oil. In one, an iniant, death occurred speedily, probably from swelling and closure of the air passages, thus leading to suffocation. In the other case, death took place on the following morning. Considering the hot taste of ammonia, it is remark- able that an infant could have had the power of swallowing nearly two ounces of strong ammoniacal liniment. It had been poured down its throat by another child of five years of age. A solution of strong ammonia has been maliciously used for throwing on the person. It must be regarded as a corro- sive liquid, capable of producing serious injury. Carbonate of Ammonia.—The solution of this salt (sal volatile) is probably more active as a poison than is commonly supposed. The following case oc- curred to my knowledge in 1832. A man, in a fit of passion, swallowed about five fluid-di-achms of a solution of sal volatile. In ten minutes, he was seized with stupor and insensibility; but upon the application of stimulant i-emedies, he recovered. He suffered for some time afterwards, from severe irritation about the throat and gullet. Mr. Iliff, jun., has reported the case of a little boy, aged two years, Avhn swallowed about half an ounce of strong solution of spirits of hartshorn, and in spite of rather severe symptoms recovered in a few days. ('Lancet,' Dec. 1, 1849.) In a paper above referred to (p. 181), Dr. Barclay relates the case of a female, a?t. 19, who, while in a state of unconsciousness, was made to sAvallow a quantity of hartshorn. She felt a severe pain in the stomach immediately, and in about an hour afterwards she vomited some blood. This vomiting of blood continued for several days. These symptoms were followed by great irritability of the stomach, and the constant rejection of food. There was obstinate constipation of the bowels, Avith great emaciation and loss of strength. She died in about three months from the time at whicli she had swallowed the alkaline poison. On inspection, the gullet was found healthy ; the orifice, at its junction with tlie stomach, was slightly contracted. The intestinal orifice was contracted to the size of a crowquill, and the coats were thickened. On the posterior wall of the stomach there was a dense cicatrix of the size of half-a-crown, and from this point fibrous bands ramified in various directions. The duodenum and other parts of the intestinal canal were healthy. (' Med. Times and Gazette,' Nov. 2G, 1853, p. 554.) A case occurred to Mr. Procter, ih May, 1852, in Avhich a woman gave to her infant, four weeks old, a tea- spoonful of hartshorn of the strength of about nine per cent. The child became more and moi-e depressed, and died thirty-six hours after taking the liquid. There Avas no vomiting or purging, and the mouth and throat pre- serited no excoriation ; there was, however, sliglitly increased redness of the lining membrane. An examination after death was not made.


[250/1290 b21964944_0250.jp2]

NOXIOUS EFFECTS OF NITRE. 186 The salts of ammonia are not often used by persons who are intent upon suicide or murder, but there is one instance on record in which a man was tried for the murder of a child by administering to it spirits of hartshorn. {Regina v. Huydon, Somerset Spring Assizes, 1845.) Of the action of the other compounds of ammonia on man, nothing is known. Chemical anah/sis.—The three alkalies, potash, soda, and ammonia, are known from the solutions of the alkaline earths by the fact that they are not precipitated by a solution of carbonate of potash. They all three possess a powerful alkaline reaction on test paper, which, in the case of ammonia, is easily dissipated by heat. Ammonia is immediately known from potash and soda by its odour and entire volatility. The Carbonate of Ammonia may be known from other salts by its alkaline reaction, its odour, and its entire vola- tility as a sohd:—from pure ammonia, 1, by its effervescing on being added to an acid ; 2, by its yielding an abundant white precipitate with a solution of chloride of calcium ; from the carbonates of potash and soda, among other properties,—1, by its giving no precipitate with a solution of the sulphate of magnesia; 2, from the rich violet blue solution which it forms Avhen added in excess to the sulphate of coj)per ; 3, by its odour and volatility. CHAPTER 16. roisoning by nitre, sulphate of potash, and iodide of potassium—chloride of barium—carbonate of baryta. Nitrate of Potash, Nitre, Saltpetre. Si/mptoms and Appearances.—This well-known salt has on several occa- sions destroyed life, but only when taken in large doses. In a case which is reported by Orfila, a lady swallowed by mistake for other salts, an ounce of the nitrate of potash. In a quarter of an hour there Avas vomiting and purging, the muscles of the face were convulsed, the pulse was weak, the respiration difficult, and the limbs were cold ; and there was a sense of burn- ing heat and severe pain at the pit of the stomach. She died in three hours. On inspection, the stomach was found highly inflamed, and the membrane detached in various parts. Near the pylorus, the inflammation had a gangre- nous character. A large quantity of bloody liquid was Ibund in the stomach, (i. 283.) In another case, which proved fatal in sixty hours, where an ounce and a half of nitre had been taken, a small perforation Avas found in the stomach. (lb.) Dr. Geoghegan, of Dublin, met Avith the following case :—A man took from an ounce to an ounce and a half of nitre by mistake for salts. Severe paiu in the abdomen followed, with violent vomiting, but no purging so far as could be ascertained. He died in about two hours after taking the salts. On examining the body, a bloody mucus Avas found in the stomach, the lining membrane Avasof a broAvnish-red colour, generally inflamed, and in parts detached from the coat beneath. None of the poison could be detected in the stomach; but its nature Avas clearly established from the analysis of a portion left in the vessel Avhich had contained the draught. Two men swalloAved, each, one ounce of nitre by mistake for Glauber's salt. They almost immediately experienced a sense of coldness in the course of the spine, trembling in the limbs, Avith violent vomiting and purging. The evacua- tions were bloody. They recovered in tlie course of a few days. (Casper's ' Wochenschrift,' xviii. 1841.) A case is reported in the same journal, in which one ounce of nitre killed a man in thirty-six hours. In another case an old man, a;t. GO, lost his life from an overdose of nitre Avhich he had taken as a medicine. The dose amounted to about ten drachms: it caused pro- fuse purging, and death in about five hours. Death was referred to inflamma-


[251/1290 b21964944_0251.jp2]

jriTRATE AND SULPHATE OF TOTASH. 187 tion of the mucous membrane of the stomach and bowels, owing to the irritant action of the nitre. A female, set. 28, swallowed in two doses, taken on two days, about an ounce of nitrate of potash. After the second dose, she was attacked with severe burning pain in the stomach, and violent vomiting followed by collapse. There was no purging, and the secretion of urine was arrested. The girl recovered in a few days. (' Pharm. Journal,' Feb. 1846, p. 356.) Mr. Gillard met with a case in which a man recovered in four days after having swallowed two ounces of nitrate of potash by mistake for Epsom salts. In about live minutes after taking the nitre, he felt a burning pain in his stomach, and this was immediately followed by sickness. Free vomiting was excited by mustard ; this probably led to his recovery. (' Prov. Med. Journ.' Aug. 19, 1846, p. 382.) There appears to be some uncertainty in the action of this salt, both as to the symptoms and the fatal effects on the body. Mr. Fuller, of Oswestry, com- municated to me a case which proved fatal in December, 1863. A man swallowed an ounce of nitre, mixed with water, by mistake for Epsom salts, about nine o'clock in. the morning. It produced vomiting with severe pain, but no purging. There was coldness of the surface and lividity of the face. Death took place in three hours. On inspection the mucous membrane of the stomach was found highly inflamed, especially towards the middle of the greater curvature, where, for several inches, it resembled scarlet cloth. The pylorus and duodenum were of a deep crimson colour. The peritoneal surface was very vascular, especially over the stomach, the vessels having a vermilion red colour, as if they had been injected. The heart and lungs were healthy, the blood was fluid and more florid than natural. The other organs presented no unusual appearance. No analysis was made of the contents of the stomach, but that the nitre was the cause of death no doubt could be entertained, and a verdict was returned accordingly at the coroner's inquest. Analysis.—For the chemical properties and method of detecting this salt, see page 172. Sulphate of Potash. Symptoms and Appearances.—A lady, about a week after her delivery, took, by the prescription of her medical attendant, about ten drachms of the sulphate of potash in divided doses, as a laxative. After the first dose, she was seized with severe pain in the stomach, nausea, vomiting, purging, and cramps in the limbs. These symptoms were aggravated after each dose : she died in tioo hows. It was supposed that some poison had been given by mistake ; but that was not the case, and the question was, whether her death was or was not caused by the sulphate of potash. On an inspection of the body, the mucous membrane of the stomach and intestines Avas pale, except in the valvula) conniventes, (folds,) in which it Avas reddened. The stomach contained a large quantity of a reddish-coloured liquid, which, on analysis, was found to contain only sulphate of potash, and no trace of any common irritant poison. The examiners referred death to sulphate of potash taken in an unusually large dose, whereby it had acted as an irritant poison on a person whose constitution was already much debilitated. (' Ann. d'Hyg.' Avril 1842.) The question whether this is to be regarded as an irritant poisonous salt or not, was much debated among members of the profession, in reference to a case which was tried at the Central Criminal Court in October 1843. (The Queen v. Haynes.) The accused had given to the deceased, the night before her death, two ounces of sulphate of potash, dissolved in Avatj^r; and it was alleged that a fortnight previously to this, she had taken in divided doses, as much as a quarter of a pound of the salt. The woman thought that she was


[252/1290 b21964944_0252.jp2]

188 NOXIOUS EFFECTS OF SULPHATE OF POTASH. pregnant, but this was disproved by an examination of the body; and it wag chai-ged that the prisoner liad given her the salt with the intention of causing a miscarriage. After the last dose, she was seized Avith sickness, and died within a very short time. The stomach was found empty, but highly inflamed ; and there was blood effused on the brain. One medical witness referred death to the action of this salt as an ii-ritant poison ; the other to apoplexy, as an indirect result of the violent vomiting caused by it. The prisoner was acquitted of the charge of murder, but subsequently found guilty of administering the sulphate with intent to procure abortion. Both of the witnesses admitted that, in small doses, the sfilt was innocent; but that m the dose of two ounces, it would produce dangerous effects. A case, somewhat similar in its details, was the subject of a trial at the Central Criminal Court in October, 1856. {Reg. v. Gai/lor.) A mai-ried woman, the wife of the pri- soner, under the belief that she was pregnant, took a large quantity of this salt, the prisoner having purchased two ounces, and handed it to her. It was taken with the design of procuring abortion, but it caused the death of the woman under symptoms of severe irritation of the .stomach and bowels. The deceased was not seen by a medical man while living, but she suffered from severe pain, vomiting, and purging: the vomited matter had a bilious colour. On inspection, the stomach and the upper portion of the small in- testines were of a deep purple colour, as if from the action of some irritating substance. The stomach, when opened, showed marks of irritation, and its mucous coat was much congested. In this organ there was a spoonful of a thick, slimy fluid, which contained a quantity of sulphate of potash. The intestines contained twelve ounces of a thick white fluid, highly charged with mucus, and this, when analysed, yielded sulphate of potash. There was no doubt that death had been caused by an overdose of this salt. According to Mr. Mowbray (' Medical Gazette,' vol. 33, p, 54), sulphate of potash is much employed in France as a popular abortive. He quotes several instances in which, in large doses, it produced severe symptoms, re- sembling those of irritant poisoning, and even death. In one case, two drachms acted powerfully; and in another that fell under his own observation, four drachms of the salt, administered to a lady after her confinement, had all the effects of an irritant poison. The above cases are the only instances in which, I believe, it is publicly known to have proved fatal in England ; and they show that substances, commonly regarded as innocent, may sometimes give rise to important questions in toxicology. There is no doubt that the most simple purgative salts may, under certain cir- cumstances, and when given in large doses, destroy life. A case is elsewhere related, in which sulphate of magnesia caused death, and gave rise to a criminal charge in this country. (' On Poisons,' 2nd ed. p. 4.) It is said that sulphate of potash has in some cases caused vomiting and other serious symptoms, from its containing as impurity sulphate of zinc. This, if present, would be easily discovered by the appropriate tests. Chemical ^iriaZ^s?'s. — Sulphate of potash is easily identified. It. is a dry hard salt, soluble in water, forming a neutral solution. This solutioi-k, if suf- ficently concentrated, is precipitated both by tartaric acid and perchloride of platinum, whereby potash is indicated ; and the presence of sulphuric acid is known by the action of a salt of baryta. Organic liquids.—This salt beino- insoluble in alcohol, may have the organic matter removed from it by treatino- the liquid containing it (previously concentrated) with alcohol :—or the sub- stance containing the salt may be evaporated to dryness and incinerated, when the undecomposed sulphate may be obtained by lixiviating the ciilcined residue with distilled water. The sulphate of potash exists naturally in son:e minimal fluids, but only in traces.


[253/1290 b21964944_0253.jp2]

IODIDE OF POTASSIUM. SALTS OF BARYTA. 189 Iodide of Potassium. Si/inpto}ns.—This salt is extensively employed as a medicinal preparation, but it appears to have given rise, in some instances, to alarming symptoms, even when exhibited iu small doses ; and it is stated that death lias resulted from its use. The following cases will perhaps serve to illustrate its alleged noxious effects. A gentleman was ordered by his physician to take three grains of the iodide in a draught of peppermint water three times a day. Aller the third dose he felt unwell; and an hour after the fourth dose lie Avas attacked with a violent shivering fit, followed by headache, hot skin, intense thirst, quick and full pulse, with vomiting and purging. These symptoms were succeeded by great prostration of strength. In spite of treatment, the purging lasted several days. The effects of the medicine in this case were so violent, although only twelve grains had been taken, that there is little doubt, if the patient had taken another dose, he would have died. ( ' Med. Gaz.' Sept. 3, 1841.) In October, 1841, a case was reported by Mr. Erichsen to the University College Medical Society, in which alarming symptoms resulted from the exhibition of only Jive grains of iodide of potassium. There was great difficulty of breathing, discharge from the eyes and nostrils, inflamed conjvinctiv£e, and most of the symptoms of violent catarrh. The iodide was discontinued and the patient recovered. Dr. Lawrie found that seven grains and a half of the iodide, in three doses, produced in an adult, dryness and irritation of the throat, great difficulty in breathing, and other serious symptoms. In another instance, thirty grains, in divided doses, caused severe headache and secretion of tears. In two instances, wherein he had prescribed it medicinally in small doses, it was, in his opinion, the cause of death. (' Med. Gaz.' xxvii. p. 588.) These cases show the necessity of caution in the medicinal use of this substance. The effects from small doses may, perhaps, be attributed to idiosyncrasy ; still there seems to be good ground, from the results of experiments on animals, for ranking iodide of potassium among noxious irritant substances. It has not, so far as I know, caused death, if we except the two cases recorded b)'' Dr. LaAvrie. One drachm and a half of the solution has been taken by a young female without destroying life, although it pro- duced .serious symptoms of irritation. (Dervergie, ' Med. Leg.' ii. 53G.) It has been .suggested that the occasional adulteration of the iodide with carbonate of potash may account for the discrepant statements respecting its poisonous pro- perties. In one instance, in which the medicinal dose had been carried to several drachms, the iodide Avas found to contain seventy-five per cent, of the carbo- nate of potash. This may explain the fact that large doses of the iodide have been given by French surgeons in the treatment of syphilis Avithout pro- ducing injurious consequences. M. Payen has prescribed as much as sixty grains a day in divided doses, and M. Ricord is stated to have carried the dose to one hundred and thirty-five grains in a day. Another theory, however, may be adopted to account for the innoxious character of these large doses. A state of tolerance may have been set up as in the administration of tartar emetic in cases of pulmonary disease. Chemical Anaii/sis.—The iodide may be distinguished by its cubic crystals and by its solution producing a blue colour with starch on the addition of strong nitric acid. The salt gives a violet colour to flame, indicative of potash, and yields iodine Avhen treated Avith sulphuric acid and oxide of manganese. Salts of Baryta. Chloride of Barium.—Symptoms.—A woman, at. 23, took by mistake for Epsom salts less than a teaspoonful (100 grains) of the chloride. This Avas at 12.30, 1st October, 1858. In half-an-hour thcj-e Avas a feeling of deadly


[254/1290 b21964944_0254.jp2]

190 CHLORIDE OF BARIUM AND CARBOXATE OF BARYTA. sickness, with sharp burning pains in the stomach and bowels. Vomitmg and purging set in violently, the purging being attended Avith straining. An hour and a half after she had taken the poison the following symptoms were ob- served by Mr. "Walsh. Face pale and anxious, eyes deeply sunk, surface cold, heart's action feeble, pulse scarcely perceptible, tongue natural and warm, loss of muscular power, sensation and intelligence not affected, pupils natural. Fluids taken were instantly rejected with a ropy mucus. There was pain in the stomach, singing in the ears, twitching of the face, and twisting of the legs and arms. At 9 p.m. the symptoms had abated, but at 2 a.m., {i.e. in about fourteen hours) the purging had returned, and the symptoms Avere much worse. There was a loss of voluntary miisciilar power. The breathing was slow and laboured, and indicated effusion in the bronchial tubes, but the woman was sensible. Soon after 3 a.m. she was convulsed, and these convulsions continued in paroxysms for two hours, when she died, seventeen hours after taking the poison. During the fits she had several watery evacuations, and consciousness was lost. There Avas no post-mortem examination. (' Lancet,' 1859, vol. 1, p. 211.) A case of poisoning by this salt is reported by Wild- berg. The symptoms Avere those of irritation, combined Avith an affection of the brain and nervous system. Giddiness, convulsions, and paralysis, have been remarked among them. In the case referred to, half an ounce proved fatal in two hours: in another instance, one ounce taken by mistake for Glauber's salt, destroyed life in an hour. In small doses, even, the chloride has been observed to affect the system poAverfully. Orfila found that the chloride of barium was absorbed : he detected it in the liver, spleen, and kidneys of animals poisoned by it. (' Ann. d'Hyg.' 1842, ii. 217.) The Carbonate of baryta is said to have destroyed life in tAvo cases, in each of Avhich only one drachm Avas taken ; but the folloAving case, Avhich occurred to Dr. Wilson, shoAvs that this compound is not so poisonous as the chloride. A young woman SAvalloAved half a tea-cupful of the poAvdered carbonate, mixed with Avater, at a time Avhen she had been fasting tAventy-four hours. There was no particular taste. In tAvo hours, she experienced dimness of sight, double vision, ringing in the ears, pain in the head, and throbbing in the temples, with a sensation of distension and Aveight at the pit of the stomach. There Avas also palpitation of the heart. After a time she complained of pain in the legs and knees, and cramps in the calves. She vomited tAvice a fluid like chalk and Avater. The skin Avashot and dry, the pulse frequent, full, and hard. These symptoms gradually abated, and she recovered, although the pain in the head and stomach continued for a long time. (' Med. Gaz.' xiv. 448.) The carbonate is used as a poison for rats and mice. Analysis.—Chloride o/6anwm crystallizes in plates: it is soluble in Avater. 1. The solution yields an insoluble white precipitate Avith sul- phuric acid or an alkaline sulphate. This precipitate is nearly insoluble in nitric acid. 2. The poAvdered salt, burnt on platinum Avire in a smokeless flame, imparts to it a greenish yelloAV colour. 3. Chlorine may be detected by a solution of nitrate of silver. (See p. 173.) Carbonate of baryta is a white insoluble poAvder. It is entirely dissolved with efferves- cence (carbonic acid) by diluted hydrochloric acid. On evaporation, it yields crystalline plates of the chloride of barium, Avhich may be tested by the processes above mentioned.


[255/1290 b21964944_0255.jp2]

SYMPTOMS OP POISONING BY PHOSPHORUS. 191 CHAPTER 17. PHOSPHORUS SYMPTOMS AND APPEAUANCES CHRONIC POISONING BY THE VAPOUR FATAL DOSE—CHEMICAL ANALYSIS—PHOSPHORUS-PASTE—RED OR ALLOTROPIC PHOSPHORUS. Si/mptoms.—Phosphorus acts as an irritant poison, but its operation is attended with some uncertainty, according to the state in which it is taken. The symptoms are frequently slow in appearing : it is only after some hours, and sometimes even one or two days, that signs of irritation with convulsions and spasms appear; but when these once come on, the case proceeds rapidly to a fatal termination. In the first instance the patient experiences a disagree- able taste resembling that of garlic, which is peculiar to this poison. An allia- ceous or garlic odour may be perceived in the breath. There is an acrid burning sensation in the throat, with intense thirst, nausea, severe pain and heat with a pricking sensation in the stomach, followed by distension of the abdomen and frequent vomiting. The vomited matters are black or of a dark green colour, and have the odour of garlic : white vapours may be seen to pro- ceed from them, and in the dark, they may even appear phosphorescent. Purging has been noticed among the symptoms, and the motions have been observed to be luminous in the dark. The pulse is small, frequent, and scarcely perceptible. There is great prostration of strength, and coldness of the skin with other symptoms of collapse. The patient may die quietly, or be convulsed before death. A woman, a?t. 26, swallowed a decoction of lucifer matches in coffee. In an hour an emetic was given to her, and she vomited half a pint of clear glairy fluid, having the smell of phosphorus, and containing particles of blue colouring matter (Prussian blue) derived from the matches. She had no pain in the stomach, and no purging. In four days she appeared to have recovered; but about this time there was bleeding from the nose; she was jaundiced, and blood appeared in the matter vomited. Febrile symptoms set in with purpura, and she died in about a week after taking the poison. (' Ed. Monthly Journal,' Oct. 1860.) On the 20th April 1861, a girl swallowed a quantity of phosphorus paste. When seen soon afterwards by Mr. Parsons of Bridgewater, her lips as well as parts of her dress were smeared with this substance, and there was a strong odour of phosphorus in her breath. Her countenance was tranquil : her pulse regular : there was no sickness or nausea, and she complained of nothing but slight thirst. Her symptoms Avere so slight that they excited no suspicion that the girl had swallowed the poison. She passed a restless night, and the next day she complained of heat in the mouth and throat, and of a slight sensation of nausea and retching. There was no pain or tenderness in the region of the stomach, the pulse was regular but weak. On the 22nd she dressed herself and was able to walk about the ward : she left the hospital and went home, having walked a mile : she had her tea as usual at night, and went to bed. On the following day, the 23rd, she complained of pain in her bowels with sickness and purging. These symptoms became worse. On the 25th, there was pain in the bowels, which were tender on pressure and slightly tympanitic. The pulse was intermittent, and the girl was fast sinking. She died on the 26th, having survived the effects of the poison nearly a week, and no well-marked symptoms having set in until the fifth day. An inspection of the body was not permitted, and the only fact observed after death was a tendency to rapid puti-efaction. The whole_ of the body became speedily livid, and the finger-nails were blue—a condition noticed by a witness to have existed before death.


[256/1290 b21964944_0256.jp2]

192 POISONING BY PHOSPHORUS. APPEARANCES. It will be jM'i-ceived that, in reference to the delay in tlie appearance of symptoms, their slightness taken as a whole, and the time at which death occurred, this case is similar to tlie one previously related. If it were not for the pecuhar character of the circumstantial evidc^nce, tliese cases might easily throw a practitioner olF his guard in forming an opinion. The odour of the breath, and the appearance of phosphorus smeared over the dress, first attracted the notice of Mr. Parsons. Other witnesses deposed that whatever deceased touched Avith her hand, seemed to take fire, and that when she drank water to allay her thirst, a kind of smoke issued from her mouth. Her hands and dress were luminous in the dark. Phosphorus-vapour. Chronic poisoning.—Chronic poisoning by phosphorus is accompanied by nauseous eructations, frequent vomiting, a sense of heat in the stomach, purging, straining, pains in the joints, wasting, hectic fever, and disease of the stomach, under which the patient slowly sinks. Some interest is attached to the chronic form of poisoning by phosphorus from the researches of Dr. Strohl and others, on the effects of the vapour upon persons en- gaged in the manufacture of phosphorus or lucifer matches. It has been remarked that such persons have suffered from necrosis of the jaw, carious teeth, and abscesses. There has been also great irritation of the respiratory organs, and bronchitis has frequently shown itself among them. These effects have been attributed to the respiration of the vapours of phos- phorus, which are supposed, in becoming acidified, to act chemically upon the exposed portions of the teeth. (See ' On Poisons,' 2nd edit. p. 345.) Appearances.—Among the appearances produced by this poison are marks of irritation and intlanunation in the stomach and intestines. The stomach has been found much contracted, and its mucous membrane inflamed, occa- sionally softened and presenting purple or violet-coloured spots. Inflammation of the stomach and bowels proceeding to gangrene, may be a result of the action of phosphorus. M. Worbe found the stomach perforated in three places in a dog which had been poisoned by a solution of phosphorus in oil. A man, set. 50, took a quantity of phosphorus-paste used for destroying vermin. He was seen in his usual health at twelve o'clock p.m., and was found dead in a field the following morning. On inspection, it Avas observed that there was great muscular rigidity. The membranes of the brain Avere congested, and there was serous effusion between them. The substance of the brain was also congested. The heart was flaccid and nearly empty. The mucous mem- brane of the stomach, gullet, and small intestines was very red, and there were patches in which the membrane was destroyed. On opening the stomach a white vapour escaped, accompanied by a strong smell of phosphorus. This organ contained a tablespoonful of a viscid greenish matter, from which particles of phosphorus with some Prussian blue (used as a colouring for the poison), sub- sided on standing. (Dr. Bingley, ' Lancet,' June 13, 1857, p. 600.) Mr. Heraj)ath states that in a case Avhich he examined he found, besides inflamma- tion of the stomach, the mucous membrane raised in small bladders or vesi- cations. This was probably a change produced by putrefaction, as the body was not examined until twenty-three days after death. Such an appearance is frequently seen in the inspections of putrefied bodies, and has not been observed in cases of recent poisoning by phosphorus. Schuchardt describes among the appearances, fluidity of the blood, which is of a dark colour, and does not become red on exposure to the air. Ecchymoses are sometimes found i on the skin and on the surface of various organs. (' Brit, and For. Med. Rev.'' 1857, vol. 19, p. 506. ' Journal de Chimie Medicale,' 1857, p. 84.) In the case of the female described at page 191, Avh(f died after the lapse off a week, there Avas no inflammation, ulceration, or softening of the mouth gullet, stomach, or small intestines. There Avas a red patch in the cjeciira and!


[257/1290 b21964944_0257.jp2]

POISOXIXG BY PHOSPHORUS. FATAL DOSE. ANALYSIS. 193 another in the colon (the large intestines). The contents of the stomach and intestines had a cofFee-ground colour, like the liquid found in hjeinatemesis (vomiting of blood). The brain was slightly congested. There were bloody effusions in the chest and abdomen, and an apoplectic condition of the soft organs. The vomited matters, Avhen shaken in the dark, were phosphorescent and phosphorus was separated from them by sulphide of carbon. The viscera, and even the flesh of animals recently poisoned by phosphorus, have the odour of garlic, and appear luminous in the dark. (Galtier, ' Toxi- cologie,' vol. 1, p. 184.) Mr. Clowes informed me, that in examining some fowls which had been poisoned with phosphorus, he was struck with the strong odour of this substance on opening the gizzards, and with the appearance of a fine white fume, which was luminous when observed in a dark room. In the case of a woman who died while taking phosphorus medicinally, it was remarked that the whole of the viscera of the body were luminous in the dark; thus indicating the extensive diffusion of the poison by absorption. (Casper's ' Wochenschrift,' 21 and 28 Feb. 1846, 115, 135.) For a further account of the appearances, see * Chemist,' Jan. 1856, p. 244. Fatal Dose.—That phosphorus is a powerfid poison, is proved by two cases quoted by Dr. Christison. In one, death was caused by a grain and a half in twelve days; in the other, by two grains in about eight days. It has been supposed to operate as a poison only by becoming converted into phosphorous acid ; but although this conversion takes place, it is probable that phosphorus passes directly into the blood, since the urine voided during life, has been observed to be luminous: hence it is itself probably a blood-poison. The production of phosphorous acid by its oxidation, may accoimt for the erosions met with in the stomach and bowels. Dr. Hartcop mentions that an apothecary took by way of experiment one grain; on the next day two grains, and on the third day three grains of phosphorus mixed with sugar. He was then seized with inflammation of the stomach and bowels, and died in spite of every attempt to save him. (Casper's ' Wochen- schrift,' 1846, p. 117.) M. Chevallier refers to a case in which a dose of 2'3 grains proved fatal, and two other cases in each of which a dose of 4-6 grains destroyed life. The same writer quotes, on the authority of Lobenstein Lcibel of Jena, the case of a lunatic who died from a dose of one-eighth of a grain. (' Ann. d'Hyg.' 1857, vol. 1, p. 422.) Excepting this, the smallest fatal dose which I have met with, is a case quoted by Galtier. A woman, 83t. 52, took in divided doses, in four days, about six centigrammes, or less than one grain, of phosphorus dissolved. The largest dose taken at once, i. e. on the fourth day, is stated to have been three centigrammes (0-462 grain), or less than half a grain. Symptoms of pain and irritation appeared, and the patient died in three days. The gullet, stomach, and small intestines, were found much inflamed. (' Toxicologic,' vol. 1, p. 87.) When the phosphorus is dissolved in any liquid, or when it is finely divided, as in phosphorus-paste or in lucifer matches, its action is then more powerful, as it is in a state well fitted for absorption. The earliest period at which death has taken place is/owr lionrs. This was in a case related by Orfila, of a young man in weak health, who took a dose of this poison. The same author mentions a case in which death did not take place until after the lapse of seventeen days. In general, several days elapse before a fatal result takes place, and during this time the patient undergoes much suffering. This was observed in a young female who swallowed a quantity of phosphorus-paste intended for poisoning rats. She did not die until the fifth day. ('<Journal de Chimie Med.' 1845, p. 580.) Chemical Analysis.—Phosphorus is a solid of waxy consistency, having a peculiar odour and taste resembling garlic. It is the odour and taste which 0


[258/1290 b21964944_0258.jp2]

194 DETECTION OF PHOSPHORUS. prevent it from being criminally employed as a poison, and render it easy of detection in articles of food. It evolves a white vapour in daylight, and a faint bluish luminosity in the dark. It melts and takes fire at a temperature of 113°, burning with a bright yellow flame, and producing thick white acid vapours by combustion. It is not soluble in water, but water in which it has been preserved or washed, acquires poisonous properties by reason of the phosphorous acid formed. ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1857, vol. 1, p. 423.) It is dis- solved by alcohol, ether, chloroform, and the oils, but especially by sulphide of carbon. . Organic Mixtures.—The smell which phosphorus imparts to organic sub- stances is remarkably characteristic. When it has been taken in a solid form the particles may be separated as a sediment, by washing the contents of the stomach in water. These may be melted under water into one mass, either by plunging the tube containing them into hot water, or by pouring hot water upon them in a glass. If a portion of the organic liquid is exposed in the dark, the particles of phosphorus will be easily recognised by their luminosity, as well as by their combustion when the surface on which the material is spread, is heated. Phosphorus is very soluble in sulphide of carbon, and it maybe separated from many organic matters by digestion with this liquid. It is thus procured from flour and phosphorus-paste, or from the residue of the contents of the stomach after washing and decantation. On the spontaneous evaporation of the sulphide, decanted from the organic liquid or solid, the phosphorus may be procured in small globules or beads. These are ignited when touched with a hot wire. A portion of the solution poured upon thin paper, ignites spontaneously when dry, and burns with its well-known flame. If the phosphorus is in a state of solution or is in too small quantity to be dis- solved out of the material by sulphide of carbon, its presence may be indicated by distilling the liquid containing it in the dark—the boiling point being raised by the addition of sulphuric acid. The vapour appears luminous as it is con- densed. In a case which occurred to Mr. Herapath, this chemist failed to detect any trace of phosphorus in a body on the twenty-third day after death : hence, like other poisons, it is liable to disaj^pear. Phosphorus readily undergoes oxidation in the body, and is thus converted into phosphorous or phosphoric acid. M. Blondlot has suggested a process for its detection when this con- version into phosphorous acid has taken place. It depends on a peculiar green colour which the lower oxides of phosphorus give to the flame of hydro- gen when burnt. (See ' Journal de Chimie,' 18G2, p. 528, also a paper by Dr. Ludwig, ' Journal de Chimie,' 1863, p. 581.) Red or Allotropic Phosphorus.—The remarkable substance, known under the name of allotropic phosphorus, is not possessed of poisonous properties. This fact, long since announced by Liebig (' Letters on Chemistry,' 165), has been confirmed by experiments at the Veterinary College at Alfort. (' Ann. d'Hyg.' 1857, vol. 1, p. 432.) Common phosphorus is poisonous in doses varying from one to three grains, while allotropic phosphorus has been given to animals in doses of thirty grains without causing symptoms of poisoning. This kind of phosphorus, by reason of its being generally in a fine poAvder, is in a .state more favourable for acting as a poison than common phosphorus, and yet, owing probably to its insolubility, it is inert. M. Bussy in 1850, and M. de Vrij in 1851, proved that a dog might take with impunity thirty grains. Orfila and Rigaut have given it to animals in doses amounting to some ounces, over a i period of twelve days, without producing any noxious effects. (See * Annuaire ■ de Therapeutique,' 1855, p. 103.) That it does not act as a poison in the human body, appears to be established by the facts of a case reported in the 'Edinburgh Monthly Journal' for October, 1860. A woman, ait. 26,. swallowed the composition scraped from a number of lucifer matches: itt turned out that these Avere made with allotropic phosphorus. She suffered no^


[259/1290 b21964944_0259.jp2]

rOISOJ^ING BY ARSENIC. 195 inconvenience. She procured other matches of common phosphorus, took a decoction of them in coffee, and she died from the effects. Analysis.—AUotropic phosphorus is easily recognized by heating it, or any mixture containing it, to about 500°, when it burns like conmion phosphorus, and yields similar products. It is insoluble in all liquids, and by its insolu- bility in sulphide of carbon, it is distinguished and separated from common phosphorus. It has no odour or taste, and is not luminous in the dark, unless it contains common phosphorus. In any analysis for phosphorus, we must take care to exclude it by employing sulphide of carbon as a solvent for the common or poisonous form of phosphorus. (The reader will find a full account of the comparative effects of the common and allotropic phosphorus by M. Chevallier in the ' Annales d'Hygiene,' 1856, vol. 1, p. 374. See also the same Journal, 1859, vol. 2, p, 370, and Casper's ' Vierteljahrsch,' 1860, vol. 2, p. 185.) METALLIC lERITANTS. CHAPTER 18. arsenic—arsenious acid—symptoms chronic poisoning appearances after death fatal dose chemical analysis—arsenites—arsenic acid—orpi- ment and other compounds. White Arsenic. Arsenious Acid. The term White Arsenic is commonly applied to the arsenious acid of chemists. It is seen under the form of a white powder, or in opaque brittle masses resembling enamel. It is called an acid from its power of combining ■with alkalies, but it possesses a feeble acid reaction when dissolved in water. It is often described as having an acrid taste, but this does not appear to be correct; a small quantity of it has certainly no appreciable taste, a fact which may be established by direct experiment, and might be inferred from its sparing solubility in liquids. It would appear from numerous cases on record, that it has been unconsciously taken in fatal quantities, in all descriptions of food, without exciting the least sensation on the tongue. Most of those per- sons who have been criminally or accidentally destroyed by arsenic, have not been aware of any taste in taking the poisoned substance. In cases in which the powder has been taken in large quantity, it is described as having had a roughish taste. Water boiled for an hour on the poison and allowed to coo], holds dissolved the 40th part of its weight, or about twelve grains in one ounce. If boiled for a shorter time not more than l-80th part will be dissolved. Cold water allowed to stand for many hours on the poison does not dissolve more than from the 1000th to the 500th part of its weight; i.e. one half grain of arsenic to nearly one fluid-ounce of water. When arsenic in powder is mixed with cold liquids, a portion of the powder adheres to the sides of the vessel. This has sometimes given rise to a suspicion of poisoning. Arsenic, as it is sold to the public in small quantities, ought to be mixed either with 1-16th part of its weight of soot, when it is of a greyish colour; or l-32nd part of its weight of indigo, and then it is blue. Both of these colours are rendered much deeper Avhen the powder is wetted, so that the sooty compound is nearly black. The act regarding the colouring of arsenic (14 Vic. c. 13, s. 3) is frequently evaded. It is sometimes sold uncoloured under the name of mercury. Symptoms.—These will vary according to the form and dose in which the poison has been administered. The time at which they come on, is generally in from half an hour to an hour after the poison has been swallowed. This is o 2


[260/1290 b21964944_0260.jp2]

196 AESENIC. SYMPTOMS OF ACUTE POISONING. the average period. I have known them to appear in a quarter of an hour. Dr. Christison mentions one instance in which the symptoms began in eight minutes; but in the case of Lofthouse, tried at the York Lent Assizes, 1835, the symptoms were proved to liave attacked the deceased while he was in the act of eating the cake in which the poison was administered. On the other hand, in an instance communicated to me by Mr. Todd, where one drachm had been taken on an empty stomach, no symptoms appeared for two liours; in a case reported by Orfila, the symptoms did not show themselves for five hours; and in another that occurred to Dr. Lachese, in which a large dose ■was taken, the symptoms did not come on for seven hours. ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1837, vol. 1, p. 344.) Dr. Thompson, of Liverpool, states that he met with a case in which from thirty to forty grains of arsenious acid, and the same quantity of chrome yellow were taken. Symptoms of poisoning did not appear imtil five or six hours afterwards. (' Med. Chir. Rev.,' Jan. 1854, p. 294.) There may be every variety between these extremes. In one case their appearance was protracted for ten hours, the maximum period yet known. A remarkable instance occuxTed to M. Tonnelier, in which the poison was taken by a young female at eleven o'clock in the morning, and no well-marked symptoms occiu-red for eight hours: there Avas then violent vomiting. After death, a cyst, formed of mucous membrane and containing arsenic, was found in the stomach : the poison having thus become sheathed over ! ('Flandin,' vol. 1, p. 535.) In a case communicated by Mr. Clegg to the 'Medical Times' (Oct. 21, 1848), symptoms of violent irritation did not show themselves until twenty-three hours after the poison had been taken, and Avithin about half an hour of the death of the patient. The girl was once sick shortly after having taken the poison, but the first symptoms Avere those of narcotism. The girl Avas a confirmed opium-eater, and this habit may in some measure have influenced the operation of the poison. From a case communicated to the ' Medical Gazette' by Dr. W. Burke Ryan (vol. 47, p. 722), it appears that the active symptoms of irritation which commonly attend arsenical poisoning, may not appear until after the lapse of nine hours from the time at Avhich the poison has been SAvallowed. With the exception of one case recorded in my work ' On Poisons (Arsenic) ' in Avhich the interval •was ten hours, this is the longest period of protraction on record. In other instances there have been great intermissions. In all cases in which arsenic enters the system from without, as by its application to the skin, or to ulcer- ated or diseased sui'faces, the symptoms are rarely manifested until after the lapse of some hours or even days. (See page 199.) The individual first experiences faintness, depression, nausea, and sickness, with an intense burning pain in the region of the stomach, increased by pres- sure. The pain in the abdomen becomes more and more severe; and there is violent vomiting of a broAvn turbid matter, mixed Avith mucus, and some- times streaked Avith blood. These symptoms are followed by purging, Avhich is more or less violent, and this is accompanied by severe cramps in the calves of the legs. The matters discharged from the stomach and boAvels have had in some instances a yellowish colour, as it Avas supposed, from a partial con- verson of the poison to sulphuret, but more probably from an admixture of bile. The vomited matters are in some cases coloured with blood, and the mixture of blood with bile, has often given to them a green or brown colour. In other cases, they may consist of a large quantity of mucus ejected in a flaky state and having a milky-white appearance, as if from admixture with the poison. The colour of the vomited matters may be blue or black when coloured arsenic has been taken, or the admixture of bile may render them of a deep green colour. The vomiting is in general violent and incessant, and IS excited by any liquid or solid taken into the stomach. There is tenesmus


[261/1290 b21964944_0261.jp2]

ARSENIC. SYMPTOMS OF CHRONIC POISONING. 197 (straining), and the discharges by the bowels are frequently tinged with blood. There is a sense of constriction, Avith a feeling of burning heat in the throat, conamonly accompanied by the most intense thirst. The pulse is small, very frequent, and irregular; sometimes Avholly imperceptible. The skin iscold and clammy in the stage of collapse; at other times it is very hot. The respiration is painful Irom the tender state of the stomach. There is great restlessness, but before death, stupor sometimes supervenes, with paralysis, tetanic convulsions, or spasms in the muscles of the extremities. In one instance trismus (lock-jaw) appeared in three quarters of an hour. (' Orfila,'vol. 1, p. 449.). Although pain is in general among the early and well-marked symptoms, arsenic appears in some cases to destroy sensibility. Thus it has been observed, that even when the stomach has been found intensely inflamed after death, the patient complained of no pain during the time which she survived. (See case by Mr. Clegg, p. 198.) Chronic Poisoning.—Should the person recover from the first effects, and the case be protracted, or should the dose have been small and administered at intervals, there will be inflammation of the conjunctivae, with suffusion of the eyes, and intolerance of light, conditions which are, however, often pre- sent among the early symptoms above described. In a case reported by Mr. Jeffreys, an adult female died in three hours after taking arsenic in a pudding served at dinner. There was no vomiting or purging. In two hours she was in a state of complete collapse, and at this time it was noticed that the con- junctiv£E (the membranes of the eyes) were red. (' Med. Times,' Aug. 30,1851, p. 229.) There is also irritation of the skin, accompanied by a vesicular erup- tion, which has been called eczema arsenicale. Sometimes this has assumed the form of nettle-rash or of the eruption attending scarlet fever, for which disease arsenical poisoning has been mistaken! Local paralysis, preceded by numb- ness or tingling in the fingers and toes, and other symptoms of nervous dis- order, are also common consequences. Exfoliation of the cuticle and skin of the tongue, with the falling off of the hair, has likewise been witnessed. (Case, of the Turners, 1815, Marshall, 119.) Salivation has been observed to follow, especially when small doses of the poison have been given for a length of time. (' Med. Gaz.' vol. 16, p. 790.) Strangury and jaundice have been noticed among the secondary symptoms. ('Marshall on Arsenic,' 44, 111.) A well-marked case of sloiv poisoning by arsenic is recorded by Flandin. (' Traite des Poisons, ou Toxicologie,' tom. 1, p. 510.) It illustrates a not unfrequent form of secret murder, and it is well calculated to inspire caution in making a diagnosis from symptoms. A woman put daily into the soup of her fellow-servant, a very small quantity of arsenious acid in powder. Shortly after dinner this person was seized with vomiting, which led to the rejection of the food and poison before the latter had caused any serious mischief As this practice was con- tinued at intervals for about six weeks, the stomach became exceedingly irritable; there was pain in the bowels, and the woman Avas much emaciated. There was also spitting of blood, with such a degree of nervous irritability, that a current of air falling upon her, caused an attack of spasms and con- vulsions. When the patient found that she could not bear anything on her stomach, she left the place and passed two months in the country. Her health became gradually re-established there, and she returned to resume her usual occupations. The prisoner, however, renewed her attempts; and to make sure of destroying life, gave to her one morning in coffee, a strong dose of arsenious acid in powder : violent vomiting ensued, and the poison was expelled with the food taken at breakfast. Arsenic was detected in the vomited matter, and the explanation of the cause of the long previous illness became clear. Under proper treatment the patient recovered. _ Such symptoms as those above described, may be easily referred to chronic inflammation, or ulceration of the stomach from natural causes, leading to perforation. There are many


[262/1290 b21964944_0262.jp2]

198 ARSENIC. APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH. anomalous cases on record, in which the symptoms have diverged so much from the ordinary course as to embarrass medical practitioners, tor some of these, I must refer to a paper by Dr. Ogston, ' Med. Gaz.' vol. 47, p. 1«1; also to my work ' On Poisons,' 2nd Ed. p. 363. • j • f-u Arsenic is not an accumulative poison ; it is temporarily deposited m the organs after absorption, but is rapidly eliminated by the urine; and m trora two to three weeks, if the person survives, the whole of it may be removed from the body. Ajjpearances after Death—The striking changes produced by arsenic are generally confined to the stomach and bowels. They are commonly well marked in proportion to the largeness of the dose, and the length of time which the person has survived after taldng the poison. Our attention must be first directed to the stomach. Arsenic seems to have a specific effect on this organ : for, however the poison may have entered into the system, whether through a wounded, diseased, or ulcerated surface, or by the act of swallowing, the stomach has been found infiamed. The mucous membrane of the stomach, which is ofl:en covered with a layer of mucus, mixed with blood or bile, and with a thick white pasty-looking substance containing arsenic, is commonly found red and inflamed in dotted or striated patches : the colour, which is of a dull or brownish red, becomes brighter on exposure to the air: at other times it is of a deep crimson hue, interspersed with black-looking lines or patches of altered blood. The redness is usually most strongly marked at the greater end; in one case it may be found spread over the whole mucous surface, giving to it the appearance of red velvet; in another it will be chiefly seen on the prominences or folds of the membrane. In one instance I found the coats thickened and of a gelatinous consistency, without any marked in- flammatory redness. The stomach has been found highly inflamed in a case which proved fatal in tivo hours. Thus it would appear that inflammation of the mucous mem- brane may be well marked within a very short period. This is confirmed by a case communicated to me by Mr. Clegg, coroner for Boston ; it was the subject of an inquest before him in Sept. 1803. A woman, a3t. 24, retired to her bed-room after dinner, at two o'clock, to lie down. At three o'clock she was not suffering fi-om any apparent illness. At 4.30 she called to her sister, and then it was found that she had swallowed a quantity of arsenic. There was then no sickness. After this, she was sick once, and purged once, but complained of no pain. She drank some tea, but almost immediately became collapsed, and seemed to those who Avere with her to be falling into a fainting fit. She died before six o'clock, and Avas sensible to the last. She could not have taken the poison more than two hours before she died. On inspection the day following, the whole mucous membrane of the stomach was intensely in- flamed, presenting a dark scarlet colour, with broad livid patches. Upwards of an ounce of solid arsenic was found in a pasty state on the mucous membrane of the stomach, which was raised, thickened, and velvety. This case shows not only that there may be extensive morbid changes in the dead body within a short period after the taking of the poison, but that with an unusually large dose, the symptoms of vomiting, purging, and pain may be slight and bear no propor- tion to the quantity of poison taken. Blood of a dark colour may be effused in various parts within the folds, or beneath the lining membrane, an appearance which has been mistaken for gangrene. A raised circular or oval patch of false membrane with an intensely red border and with arsenic upon its surface, may be sometimes seen upon the inner coat. [See the case of the Queen against Dare and Spry, C.C.C. August 28, 1848 ; also ' Med. Gaz.,' Nov. 24,1848.] The stomach often contains a mucous liquid of a dark colour tinged with blood. The coats are sometimes thickened in patches, being raised up into a sort of


[263/1290 b21964944_0263.jp2]

ARSENIC. DEATH FROM EXTERNAL APPLICATION. 199 fungus-like tumour, with arsenic imbedded in them : at other times tliey have been found thinned. The mucous membrane is rarely found ulcerated, aud still more rarely gangrenous. Ulceration of the mucous membrane, as the result of the action of arsenic, has been found as early as ten hours after the poison had been taken. Perforation of the coats is so uncommon a result of arsenical poisoning, that there are but few instances on record. In a case examined by M. Chevallier, the stomach of a person Avho had died from the effects of arsenic, was Ibund perforated at the larger end. The aperture is described to have been of the size of a franc piece, round, soft, and somewhat thickened in its margin. There was no redness or sign of erosion about it, nor was there any appearance of ulceration on the other parts of the mucous membrane. Externally the stomach was covered with false membranes, arising from inflammation of the peritoneum. ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1852, voh 1, p. 448.) This case is so imperfectly reported that it is impossible to say Avhether the perforation was caused by arsenic, or whether it was the result of previous disease. The mucous glands of the stomach have been found enlarged ; but this is by no means an unusual morbid appearance from any cause of local irritation, without reference to poisoning. Various appearances are said to have been met with in the lungs, heart, brain and urinary organs; but they do not appear to be so characteristic of arsenical poisoning, as to admit of medico-legal use in enabling a medical man to distinguish poisoning from disease. It is to the stomach and intestines that he must look for the basis of reliable evidence in regard to appearances after death. Dr. Wilks met with an ecchymosed condition of the lining membrane of the left ventricle of the heart in a case in which a man died in twelve hours from acute poison- ing by arsenic. In a few instances the mouth, throat, and gullet have been found inflamed, hnt in general there are no changes in these parts to attract particular atten- tion. The mucous membrane of the S7nall intestines may be inflamed through- out, but commonly the inflammatory redness is confined to the upper part or to the duodenum, especially to that portion which joins the stomach. Of the large intestines, the rectum appears to be the most prone to inflammation. The liver, spleen, and kidneys present no appearances which can be connected with the action of arsenic, although these, like the other soft organs, may be- come receptacles of the absorbed poison. It is worthy of observation in rela- tion to the known antiseptic properties of arsenic, that the parts especially affected by the poison (the stomach and intestines) occasionally retain the well-marked characters of irritant poisoning for a long time after death. Absorbed arsenic does not, however, appear to prevent the decomposition of the soft organs in which it is deposited. Death from External Application.—Poisoning by tlie external application of arsenic is not very common. In Febraary 1864, I was required to in- vestigate a case of suspicious death which occurred near Halesworth in Suffolk. A girl, ^t. 9, died rather suddenly, after an illness of about ten days. The mother had rubbed some precipitate ointment mixed with arsenic on the head of the child, which was diseased. Her object, she stated, was to kill the vermin on the scalp. No symptoms of note were observed until about the fifth day after the application, when the child appeared ill and complained of thirst. On the eighth day she was very unwell; there liad been cramp, with slight action on the bowels, but no vomiting. She became drowsy, and died on the tenth day. Mr. Haward examined the body, and forwarded to me the viscera for a chemical analysis, the case being very obscure. The lining membrane of the stomach and duodenum was inflamed : in the stomach the inflammation Avas well marked towards the greater end : these were the principal post-mortem appearances. Traces of arsenic were found in thft


[264/1290 b21964944_0264.jp2]

ARSENIC. POISONING BY THE VAPOUR. 200 mucous fluids of the stomach, in the coat of the stomach and intestines, and in four ounces of the liver, but arsenic in a solid form could nowhere be de- tected. A portion of the diseased haiiy scalp was examined, and yielded arsenic as well as mercury (from white precipitate), in large proportion, the arsenic being estimated at from two to three grains. From the evidence given at the inquest there was no doubt that the mother's account was correct, and that her child had died from the ignorant apphcation of arsenic externally to a diseased portion of the scalp. The remarkable features of the case were these : no symptoms appeared until after the fourth day, and then only great thirst; there was slight purging with cramps on the eighth day, and death took place on the tenth, without any vomiting. Arsenic was found in the stomach and contents, and its presence there might have led to an erroneous inference of its having been criminally administered by the mouth. It was, however, merely in traces, and obviously enough the result of mucous elimination. The nature and mode of occurrence of the symptoms were also opposed to any other presumption. That absorbed arsenic may be thus transferred from the blood to the stomach and intestines, has been distinctly proved by the experiments of Dr. Pavy and myself. (' Guy's Hospital Eeports,' 1860, vol. 6, p. 397.) Arsenic in Vapour.—It is not often that a case is heard of in which arsenious acid has caused death by reason of its having been breathed or swallowed in the state of vapour. In April 1858, a case involving the eifects of arsenical vapours was the subject of an inquest in London (see ' On Poisons,' 2nd edit. p. 234), but on that occasion, there was an entire failure of proof that the arsenical vapour was the cause of death. I am indebted to Mr. Oxley of Rotherham, for the account of a case that fell under his notice, which was the subject of a trial at the York Lent Assizes, 1864. The prisoner placed some burning pyrites containing arsenic at the entrance of the door of a small room in which there were eight children, including an infant in a cradle. From the evidence, it appeared that all the children suffered from the fumes, which were chiefly those of sulphurous acid. A canary that was in a cage died from the effects. The children were speedily removed from the house and recovered, but the infant was left there for an hour. It suffered from vomiting, and when seen by Mr. Oxley about seven- teen hours afterwards, the child was pulseless: it vomited incessantly, was much purged, and appeared to be in great pain. It died about twenty-four hours after exposure to the fumes. On inspection, the stomach and in- testines were slightly inflamed. The brain and lungs were congested, and the lining membrane of the trachea was of a bright red colour. Dr. Allan de- tected arsenic in the contents of the stomach, in the lungs, in the coats of the stomach and the spleen. None was found in the liver. The pyrites contained arsenic, and gave off arsenious acid in vapour, and sulphurous acid while burn- ing. Some of the appearances were owing to sulphurous acid, but death Avas probably caused by arsenic. The prisoner was found guilty of manslaughter. Qitantity required to destroy Life.—The smallest fatal dose hitherto recorded was observed in a case communicated by Dr. Castle, of Leeds, to the ' Pro- vincial Journal,' (June 28, 1848, p. 347). A woman took half an ounce of Fowler's solution (arsenite of potash) in unknown doses, during a period of five days. She then died; and on examination the stomach and intestines were found inflamed. Death took place by syncope (mortal fainting), and there was an absence of vomiting and purging. The quantity of arsenic which here destroyed life, could not have been more than two grains, in another case, two grains and a half of arsenic, contained in two ounces of Fly- water, killed a robust healthy girl, aged nineteen, in thirty-six hours. (See .'Med. Gaz.' vol. 39, p. 116.) Hence under circumstances favourable to the


[265/1290 b21964944_0265.jp2]

201 FATAL DOSE. PERIOD OF DEATH. operation of the poison, the fatal dose in an adult may be assigned at from two to three grains. Period at wh ich Death takes place.—Large doses of arsenic commonly prove fatal in from eighteen hours to three days. The average time at which death takes place is twenty-four hours; but the poison may destroy life within a much shorter period. There are now many authentic cases reported, in which death has occurred in from three to six hours. In 1845 I met with a well- marked case of death from arsenic in five hours; and in another, which oc- cuiTcd in April 1849, death took place in two and a half hours. ('Guy's Hospital Reports,' Oct. 1850, 183. See also * Ann. d'Hyg.' 1837, vol. 1, p. 339.) Mr. Foster, of Pluntingdon, met with the case of a child under three years of age, who died within tn'o hours from the effects of arsenic. The quantity taken could not be determined. The most rapidly fatal case which 1 have met with was communicated to me by Mr. Thompson. It is that of a youth, ait. 17, who died in April 1860, from the effects of a large dose of arsenic—the symptoms from which he suffered being of a tetanic character. The poisoning was the result of an accident at Ramsey, in the Isle of Man. The medical evidence at the inquest was to the effect that not more than twenty minutes had elapsed between the time at which deceased sat down to eat his supper, containing the poison, and his death. In some instances death does not occur until long after the average period. In one case in which an adult swallowed about haU' an ounce, death did not take place for ffty hours, and it is remarkable that there was an entire absence of pain. (' Med. Gaz.' vol. 48, p. 446.) In the case of the Duke de Praslin, one large dose was taken, but death did not occur until the sixth day. ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1847, vol. 2, p. 367.) In October 1847, a man who had swallowed 220 grains of arsenic was admitted into Guy's Hospital. He died on the seventh day. It is obvious that a patient who recovers from the first effects of this poison may still die from exhaustion or other secondary causes many days or weeks after having taken it, even although the whole of the poison has been eliminated from the body. Thus in the case of Dr. Alexander, death took place on the sixteenth day; and although a large quantity had been taken, no arsenic was found in the body. (' Med. Times and Gazette,' April 18, 1857, p. 389.) In one instance in which arsenic was applied externally to the head, the person did not die until the twentieth day. The longest duration of a case of poison- ing by arsenic is probably that reported by Belloc. A woman, aged 56, employed a solution of arsenic in water to cure the itch, which had resisted the usual remedies. The skin became covered with an erysipekitous eruption, and the itch was cured, but she experienced severe suffering. Her health gi-adually failed, and she died after the lapse of two years, having suffered during the whole of this period from a general tremor of the limbs. (' Cours de Med. Leg.,' 121.) Chemical Analysis. Arsenic as a Solid.—In the simple state, white arsenic may be identified by the following properties:—1. A small quantity of the powder, placed on platinum foil, is entirely volatilized at a moderate heat (370°) in a white vapour. Should there be any residue, it is impurity ; some- times plaster of Paris or chalk is found mixed with it. If a small portion of the white powder be very slowly heated in a glass tube of narrow bore, it will be sublimed without melting, and form a ring of minute octahedral crystals, remarkable for their lustre and brilliancy. Under a microscope of high magnifying power (250 diameters), the appearance of these crystals is remark- ably beautiful and characteristic : one not exceeding the 4,000th of an inch in diameter may be easily recognized by the aid of this instrument. They may be measured even to the lG,0O0th of an inch in diameter. (See illustrations,


[266/1290 b21964944_0266.jp2]

202 ARSENIC. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. REDUCTION PROCESS. pp. 202, 203.) It will be observed in these experiments that white arsenic in vapour possesses no odour. 2. On boiling a small quantity of the poAvder m distilled water, it is not dissolved, but it partly floats in a sort of film, while a part becomes aggregated in small lumps at the bottom of the vessel. It reqiiires long boiling, in order that it siiould become dissolved and equally diffused through water. 3. When the powder is treated with a weak solution of sul- phide of ammonium in a watch glass, there is no change of colour, as there is with most metallic poisons : on heating the mixture, the white powder is dissolved ; and on continuing the heat until the ammonia is expelled, a rich yellow or orange-red film is left (sulphide of arsenic), which is soluble in alka- lies, and insoluble in hydrochloric acid. 4. Heated on platinum wire in a smokeless fiame, the powder imparts to it a pale blue colour, while it is vola- tilized in white ftuues. Reduction Process.—When a small portion of the powder, i. e. from one- fourth to one-twentieth part of a grain, is heated with some reducing agent containing carbon, such as soda Jlux (obtained by incinerating acetate or tar- trate of soda in a close vessel), in a glass tube about three inches long and from one-eighth to a quarter of an inch in diameter, it is decomposed: a ring of metallic arsenic of an iron-grey colour is sublimed and deposited in a cool part of the tube. Well dried ferrocyanide of potassium may be substituted in this experiment for soda flvix (Davy). Two parts of soda flux may be used to one of arsenic, or equal parts of ferrocyanide of potassium and arsenious acid. After heating, a minute trace of arsenic remains in the flux which cannot be expelled by heat. During the reduction, there is a perceptible odour, resem- bling that of garlic, which is possessed by metallic arsenic only, while passing from a state of vapour to arsenious acid. This odour was at one time looked upon as peculiar to arsenic, but no reliance is now placed on it as a matter of mm 1. Berzelius's reduction tube, with gubli- mate of metallic arsenic. 2. Ordinary reduction tube, with two subli- mates: the upper, browniish black ; the lower, the pure metal in an annular deposit. 3. Small reduction tube, with a crystalline sublimate of arsenious acid. 4. The tube with sublimate magnified, showing the octahedral form of the crystals. These are shown still more highly magnified in the illustration at p. 203. medical evidence—it is a mere accessory result. In this experiment of reduc- tion, there are frequently two rings deposited in the tube (fig. 2) - -the upper and larger nng has a brown colour, and appears to be a mixture of finely


[267/1290 b21964944_0267.jp2]

CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. LIQUID TESTS. 203 divided metallic arsenic and arsenious acid: the lower ring is small and consists of the pure metal. In order to determine the roeigJit of a subli- mate, the glass tube should be filed off closely on each side of the metallic ring, and weighed; the sublimate may then be driven off by heat, and the piece of glass again weighed:—the difference or loss represents the weight. These sublimates are remarkably light, and require to be weighed in a delicate balance. By heating gently the tube containing the sublimate (reduced to powder) in another tube of larger diameter, the metallic arsenic, during volatilization, forms octahedral crystals of arsenious acid, which, after examination by the microscope, may be dissolved in a few drops of Avater, and tested by one or more of the liquid reagents. The metallic sublimate, or the crystals produced from it, may be further subjected to the following process:—Break the glass on which the sublimate is deposited, into frag- ments, and digest these in a few drops of the strongest nitric acid, containing nitrous acid, previously proved to be free from arsenic. The sublimate is thereby converted into arsenic acid. The acid solution should be evaporated to dryness; the white uncrystalline residue obtained should be dissolved in a few drops of distilled water, and a strong solution of nitrate, or of ammonio- nitrate, of silver added in small quantity to the residue. A brick-red colour- ation indicates arsenic acid, and thus proves incontestably that the sublimate was of an arsenical nature. The ixpper or brownish-looking sublimate (fig. 2), may be readily con- verted into one of the pure metal, by gently heating it in the flame of a spirit lamp. Arsenious acid is then volatilized, and an iron-grey deposit of metallic ai'senic appears. If the heat is continued, the whole of the metallic subhmate is volatilized and deposited in a cool part of the tube, in transparent and colourless octahedra of arsenious acid. This is the special character of an arsenical sublimate : it may be thus distinguished fi'om sublimates of all metals or metalloids. The lower metallic sublimate procured by reduction (fig. 2) may appear not in an annular form, but in particles of a somewhat globular shape. These are of an iron-grey colour, quite unlike sublimed mercury, and when examined by the microscope, it may be seen that they consist of crystalline masses nucleated, and that they are not strictly spherical. This sublimate is produced in the last stage, when the residue in the tube is strongly heated. The process of reduction, with the corroborative results above mentioned, is, when thus applied, conclusive of the arsenical nature of the substance under examination. Crystals of Arsenious Acid by sublima- Crystals of Arsenious Acid fi-om a solu- tion, magnified 30 diameters. tion, magnified 124 diameters. Arsenic in solution in Water. Liquid Tests.—The solution of arsenious acid is clear colourless, possesses scarcely any perceptible taste, and has but a feebly acid reaction. In this state, we should first evaporate slowly a few drops


[268/1290 b21964944_0268.jp2]

204 ARSENIC. ANALYSIS. SULPIIUKETTED HYDROGEN. on a glass slide, when a crystalline crust will be obtained. On examining tins crust Avith a microscope, it will be found to consist of numerous minute octa- hedral crystals, presenting triangular surfaces by reflected light. (See illustration, p. 203.) 1. Silver Test.—On adding to the solution, avimonio-nitrate of silver, a-pale yellow precipitate of arsenite of silver falls down;—changing, under exposure to daylight, to a greenish-brown colour. The test is made by_ adding to a strong solution of nitrate of silver, a weak solution of ammonia, and continuing to add the latter, until the bi-own oxide of silver, at first thrown down, is almost re-dissolved. The yellow precipitate is soluble in nitric, tartaric, citric, and acetic acids, as well as in ammonia. It is not dissolved by potash or soda. 2. Copper Test.—On adding to a solution of arsenic, ammonio-sulphate of copper, a light green precipitate (arsenite of copper) is formed, the tint of which varies according to the proportion of arsenic present, and the quantity of the test added : hence, if the arsenic is in small proportion, no green precipitate at first appears; the liquid simply acquires a blue colour from the test. In less than an hour, if arsenic is present, a bright green deposit is formed, which may be easily separated from the blue liquid by decantation. This test is made by adding ammonia to a weak solution of sulphate of copper, until the bluish- white precipitate, at first produced, is nearly re-dissolved: it should not be used in large quantity if concentrated, as the deep blue colour tends to obscure or conceal the green precipitate formed. The precipitated arsenite of copper is soluble in all acids, mineral and vegetable, and in ammonia, but not in potash or soda. If a small quantity of the blue aramoniacal solution of this precipitate is poured over a crystal of nitrate of silver, a film of yellow arsenite of silver will appear around the crystal, by the production of arsenite of silver. If a strong solution of nitrate is added to the blue liquid, nearly neutralised by diluted sulphuric acid, a yellow precipitate of arsenite of silver is also pro- duced. Thus the silver and copper tests may be employed with one quantity of liquid. The dried precipitate of arsenite of copper, when slowly and moderately heated in a well-dried reduction-tube, yields a ring of octahedral crystals of arsenious acid,—oxide of copper being left as a residue. 3. Sulphuretted Hydrogen Test.—The sulphide of ammonium gives no pre- cipitate in a solution of arsenic until an acid has been added, by which pro- perty, arsenic is known from most metallic poisons. On adding an acid (dilute hydrochloric free from arsenic), a rich golden yellow-coloured precipitate is thrown down (orpiment or sulphide of arsenic). It is better, however, to employ in medico-legal analysis, a current of washed sulphuretted hydrogen gas, which is easily procured by adding to sulphide of iron in a proper apparatus, a mixture of one part of strong sulphuric acid and three parts of water. The arsenical liquid should be slightly acidulated with pure diluted hydrochloric acid, before the gas is passed into it: at least, care should be taken that it is not alkaline. The yellow compound is'immediately produced if arsenic is pre- sent, and it may be collected after boiling the liquid sufficiently to drive off any surplus gas. The precipitation is likewise facilitated by adding to the liquid a solution of hydrochlorate of ammonia. The yellow precipitate is known to be sulphide of arsem'c by the following properties:—1. It is insoluble in water, alcohol, and ether, as well as in diluted hydrochloric acid, and vegetable acids: but it is decomposed by strong nitric and nitro-hydrochloric acids. 2. It IS immediately dissolved by potash, soda, or ammonia; formino-, if no organic matter is present, a colourless solution. 3. When dried and^'heated with three parts of soda-flux, or of dry ferrocyanide of potassium, it gives a sublimate of metallic arsenic. Unless these properties are proved to be possessed by the yellow precipitate formed by sulphuretted hydrogen in an


[269/1290 b21964944_0269.jp2]

ARSENIC. marsh's AND REINSCIl'S TROCESSES. 205 unknown liquid, it cannot be a compound of arsenic; and it would not be safe as a general rule to receive evidence on the point. On the other hand, when these properties are possessed by the precipitate, it must be arsenic, and can be no other substance. Mill'sh's Process. Bi/drogen Test.—The action of this test depends on the decomposition of arsenious acid and its soluble compounds, by hydrogen evolved from the action of diluted sulphuric or hydrochloric acid on zinc. The materials should be first proved to be free from arsenic. The apparatus is of the most simple kind, and is so well known as to need no description. The arsenic may be introduced into the short leg of the tube in the state of powder; but it is far better to dissolve it in water, by boiling, either with or without the addition of a few drops of potash. The metallic arsenic combines with the hydrogen, forming arsenuretted hydrogen gas, which possesses the following properties:—1. Filtering paper wetted with a solution of nitrate of silver is immediately blackened by the gas—the silver being reduced to the metallic state. Lead-paper is not changed in colour imless sulphuretted hydi-ogen is also present. 2. It burns with a pale bluish-white flame, and thick ■white smoke (arsenious acid). 3. A slip of glass or of white porcelain held in the flame near the point (for not too long a time) acquires a dark stain from the deposit of metallic arsenic upon it. This deposit presents a metallic lustre in the centre (a), a white film of arsenious acid on the outside (c), and betAveen the two a dark ring of a pulverulent substance (b), which, when viewed by transmitted light, is hair-brown in colour towards the margin, but perfectly opaque in the centre. In order to determine the arsenical nature of the deposits, the following plan may be adopted:— Several of them should be received and accumu- lated in small porcelain capsules, held over the burning gas. To one, add a solution of chloride of lime : the arsenical deposit is immediately dis- solved. To a second, add a solution of sulphide of ammonium: the metallic deposit is detached, but not perfectly dissolved : yet on evaporation it yields a pale yellow film of sulphide of arsenic. To a third, add a few drops of the strongest nitric con- taining some nitrous acid. The deposit is dissolved : Deposit obtained by Marsh's evaporate the acid solution gently to dryness; care- ^ Metal fully neutralize the residue, and add one or two b." Mixed depnpit. drops of a strong solution of nitrate of silver. A c. Arsenious acid, brick red stain or a dark red precipitate of arsenate of silver will be produced. ReinscKs Process.—In the application of this process, the liquid suspected to contain arsenic, or the soUd dissolved in distilled water, is boiled with from one-sixth to one-eighth part of pure hydrochloric acid (proved to be free from arsenic), and a small slip of copper is then introduced. A slip of polished copper foil (electric copper) about a quarter of an inch square, attached to the end of a fine platinum wire, may be employed for the experiment. The copper must be first proved to be free from arsenic, as this is a very com- mon contamination of commercial copper in the form of foil, gauze, or wire. If arsenic is present in the liquid, even in small quantity, the polished copper acquires either immediately or within a few minutes a dark iron-grey coating from the deposit of this metal. This is apt to scale off, if the arsenic is in large quantity, or if the liquid is very acid or long boiled. We remove the slip of copper, Avash it in water, dry it, and gently heat it in a reduction-tube, when arsenious acid will be sublimed in minute octahedral crystals: if these should not be apparent from one piece of copper, several may be successively introduced. When the quantity of arsenic is very small, the polished copper


[270/1290 b21964944_0270.jp2]

200 ARSEXIC. DETECTION IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS. merely acquires a faint violet or bluish tint. The deposit is in all cases materially affected by the qiiantity of water present, or, in other words, the degree of dilution, and sometimes it Avill appear only after the liquid has been much concentrated by evaporation. We are not obliged to dilute the liquid in the experiment, and there is no material loss of arsenic, as in the hydrogen process:—the Avhole may be removed and collected by the introduction of successive portions of pure copper. This process is extremely delicate, the results are speedily obtained, and are highly satisfactory. Among the cautions to be observed are these: 1. not to employ too large a surface of copper in the first instance; and 2. not to remove the copper from the liquid too soon. When the arsenic is in minute quantity, and the liquid much diluted, the deposit does not take place sometimes for half an hour. If the copper is kept in for an hour or longer, it may acquire a dingy tarnish from the action of the acid and air. There is one coiToboration required. The steel-grey colour of the deposit is in itself characteristic of arsenic, but whether thisis seen or not, the copper with the deposit upon it, should be well dried, cut into small pieces if necessary, and introduced into a dry and perfectly clean reduction- tube. The application of a gentle heat by a spirit lamp will cause the metallic arsenic to be volatilized as white arsenious acid, which is deposited in a cool part of the tube, in the form of octahedi-a or of the derivatives of the octahedron. When examined by a quarter of an inch power under the microscope, these crystals may be seen and recognized by their shape up to the sixteen-thousandth of an inch in width. The smaller the crystal the more perfect the form. (See fig. 4, p. 202.) If the copper with the deposit and the tube have not been well dried, the angularity of form is not distinct. These crystals may be tested by the processes described at p. 203. The best method of testing copper for arsenic is, I believe, the following : Expose the copper to air in a saucer or vessel containing pure and strong hydrochloric acid. In a few days a dark brown liquid is procured (a mixture of subchloride of copper in the surplus acid). This acid liquid should be slowly distilled in a fiask or retort by the aid of a sand-bath. (See Illustration, p. 208.) If arsenic is contained in the copper, it will be obtained as a clear, colourless chloride in the receiver with hydrochloric acid. The acid distillate, properly diluted, should now be placed with pure zinc in a flask, and the gas produced should be tested for arsenic by the various methods elsewhere described (p. 209). Mr. Abel has communicated to me a very simple method tor testing the presence of arsenic in copper. Add to pure hydrochloric acid, diluted with six parts of water, one or two drops of a weak solution of per- sulphate or perchloride of iron. Boil the acid liquid and introduce the copper, well cleaned and polished, into the boiling liquid. Arsenicated copper soon acquires a dark tarnish, while the non-arsenicated (electric) copper retains its colour under these circumstances. It is unnecessary in this place to enter into a comparison of the processes of Marsh and Reinsch, in respect to their relative powers of enabling the analyst to detect small quantities of arsenic. It may be conceded that Marsh's process will detect a smaller quantity of arsenic than the process of Reinsch, but the latter, when the quantity of hquid is small, will detect the l-150th or the I-200th part of a grain of the poison, and this is itself a point of delicacy in analysis which, when the issues of life and death are involved, mio-ht almost suffice to justify a reasonable distrust of the resources of science. It would require considerable courage to go beyond this, and it appears to me that in a criminal case, it would not be safe to depose to the presence of arsenic from Marsh's process alone, when the quantity of poison was too small to admit of separation or corroboration by the process of Reinsch. Conversely, the re- sults of Reinsch's, should be corroborated by those of Marsh's process. When the point of detection by Reinsch's process has been passed, then we increasr


[271/1290 b21964944_0271.jp2]

AESEXIC IX ORGANIC MATTER. DISTILLATION TROCESS. 207 the chance of fallacy to which Marsh's process is always exposed, by the fact that such very minute traces of arsenic may have existed in some of the ma- terials used, or in the apparatus employed. It was this over-reliance on the extreme delicacy of the process in researches where it admitted of no corrobo- ration whatever, that led Ox-fila to assert that arsenic was a natural constituent of the human body ! Arsenic in liquids containing Organic Matter.—The liquid for analysis should be strained through muslin, or filtered through paper in order to separate any insoluble matters; these should be well pressed and drained. Should the liquid be coloured, this is of little moment, provided it is clear. If viscid, it should be diluted with water, and boiled with a small quantity of hydro- chloric acid; on standing, a deposit may take place, and this should be separ- ated by a filter. Dialysis may be now resorted to, but this has the disadvantage of diffusing the arsenic with soluble organic matter through a very large quan- tity of water. As a trial test, we may boil in a portion of the liquid, acidu- lated with pure hydrochloric acid, a slip of pure copper highly polished, and test any deposits on the metal by the method above described. Precipitation as sulphide.—"SVlien arsenic is present in an organic liquid in large quantity, it may be precipitated as sulphide by a cui-rent of washed sulphuretted hydrogen. The liqiiid should be boiled, filtered, and acidulated with hydrochloric acid before passing the gas into it. When precipitation has ceased, the liquid should be again filtered, the precipitate collected, dried and weighed. By operating on a measured portion of the solution, the amount of white arsenic present may be determined by the weight of the sulphide obtained —five parts by Aveight of sulphide being equal to four parts of white arsenic. The properties of the yellow precipitate should be verified according to the rules mentioned at page 204. In some cases arsenic may be present, but in a qiiantity too small to be precipitated as sulphide by sulphuretted hydrogen. In others the presence of certain substances may interfere with or prevent precipitation. The presence of any alkali in a liquid prevents the formation of a precipitate. (Chemical News, Dec. 12, 1863.) The contents of the stomach or any liquid article of food may contain arsenic in an insoluble form—i.e. as a crystalline powder. This may be separated as a heavy sediment, by careful Avashing with distilled water, and then tested by the reduction-process (p. 202). When arsenic is thus found in powder, as a sediment in organic liquids, it is obvious that it must have been taken in the solid state, and, although mixed with a liquid or solid, still in an imdissolved form. Arsenic, adminis- tered in a state of solution, could not become solid in the stomach except as a result of perfect desiccation of the tissues. If foimd only dissolved, it may have been taken either in solution or in a solid form—the dissolved portion being part of the solid taken up by the fluids of the stomach, and the remainder having been expelled by vomiting and purging. This question was of importance in Beg. V. Sturt, Leaves Lent Assizes, 1863. The deceased, in this case, died from the eflfects of arsenic in powder, administered, it was believed, in a mince-pie. It was suggested that the poison might have been swallowed in ginger-beer, but then it could not have been in a state of solution : it must have been mechanically mixed with the liquid. The learned Judge who tried this case, was obviously not aware of any difference existing between the actual solution and the mechanical suspension of a solid in a liquid. Distillation Process.—When the poison is in so small a quantity that it does not admit of precipitation by sulphuretted hydrogen, and no solid par- ticles of arsenic are found in the stomach, in its contents, or in any article of food, another method may be resorted to for detecting its presence. This method equally applies to the detection of arsenic deposited as a result of ab- sorption in the soft organs of the body, as in the liver, kidney, or heart, and to


[272/1290 b21964944_0272.jp2]

208 DISTILLATION PROCESS FOR ARSENIC. arsenic in all its forms, except the pure insoluble sulphide or orpiment. Although, after long interment, white arsenic passes, more or less rapidly, into the state of yellow sulphide as a result of chemical changes during putrefaction, the conversion is generally only partial or superficial. I have never found it to be so complete as to prevent the detection of the poison by the distillation pro- cess. The only condition for success is, that the substance, whether food, blood, mucus, the liver, or other organ, should be first thoroughly dried either by exposure to a current of air or by a water-bath. The dried solid should theii be broken into small portions and placed in a flask or retort of suflficient capacity, with a quantity of the strongest hydrochloric acid to drench it completely. The freedom of this acid from arsenic, should be fir.st carefriUy determined. The complete separation of arsenic from organic substances depends greatly on their perfect desiccation, and on the concentration of the acid employed. After some hours' digestion the retort or flask (a) containing the mixture—which should be of such a size that the materials should not fill it to more than one-third or one- half of its capacity—should be fitted Avith a long condensing tube (c), and then gradually heated by a sand-bath until the acid liquid begins to pass over. A metallic head, formed of a cone of tin plate, should be placed over the retort or flask so as to concentrate the heat and prevent condensation in the upper part of the vessel. A small flask receiver (d) with a loosely-fitting cork may be employed to collect the product. This should contain a small quantity of dis- tilled water so as to fix and condense any vapours that may pass over. The receiver, as well as the condensing-tube, should be kept cool by wetting its surface with cold water diffused on a layer of bibulous paper placed over it. The perfect condensation of the distilled liquid is ensured by this arrange- ment. The distillation may be carried to dryness on a sand-bath, or nearly so ; and it may be sometimes advisable, in order to ensure the separation of the whole of the arsenic as chloride, to add to the residue in the retort, another portion of pure and concentrated hydrochloric acid, and again distil to dry- ness. I have, however, found that portions of dried liver and stomach gave tip every trace of arsenic by one distillation, when a sufficient quantity of hydrochloric acid had been used, and the process slowly conducted by a regu- lated sand-bath heat. Apparatus for distilling organic and mineral substances containing Arsenic. The liquid product is sometimes coloured, and highly offensive if distilled from decomposed animal matter. It may also be turbid. Exposure to the air for a few hours sometimes removes the offensiveness, and there is a pre- cipitation of sulphur, or of some sulphide of arsenic. The distillate may be separated from any deposit by filtration, and if still turbid, it may be a-ain distilled at a lower heat to separate it from any organic matter that may have come over. If arsenic was present in the solid, the distillate wiU contain chloride of


[273/1290 b21964944_0273.jp2]

rEODUCTION OF ARSKNURETTED HYDROGEiY. 209 jvrsenic, which does not escape from a diluted solution at common temperatiives. The quantity of dry organic substance used in the experiment must depend on the qnantity of arsenic present, as revealed by a preliminary trial with Reinsch's process. If large, two or throe drachms of the di-ied substance, or even less, will yield sulBcient chloride of arsenic for further proceedings. For the absorbed and deposited poison, half an ounce of the dried organ, corre- sponding to two ounces of the soft organ, will frequently suffice ; but a nega- tive conclusion of the absence of arsenic should not be drawn from a smaller quantity than .two to four ounces of the dried substance, whether liver, kidney, or heart. These tissues, it must be remembered, contain about 76 per cent, of Avater. If oily matter should be distilled over, this may be separated by passing the distillate through a paper filter wetted with water. I have found this process efficient for procuring a clear solution of chloride of arsenic from such different substances as starch—a cake—ordinary food—the liver and other soft organs—the scalp of the head—blood—contents of the stomach—arsenical wall-papers—metallic copper—blue vitriol—and various mineral powders. I have thus discovered arsenic in two ounces of the earth of a cemetery at Boston, and in a like quantity of earth from the cemetery of Kirkby Lonsdale, as Avell as in Thames mud, in spite of the presence of much oxide of iron and earthy matter. Wherever the arsenic admits of solution in hydrochloric acid, however small the quantity present, it may be readily obtained as chloride. This distillation-process has the advantage of not inter- fering with the research for mercury, lead, copper, and other poisonous metals which do not form volatile chlorides. Arsenic is thus separated from them, and these metals may be found in the residue contained in the flask or retort. Even antimony, which forms a volatile chloride, is not so readily distilled over as arsenic. The distilled liquid may either be preserved for examination, or it may be at once submitted to a further stage of a^lysis. For this purpose one third of it should be diluted with three or four parts of water and boiled in a clean flask. When boiling, a piece of bright copper-foil (free from arsenic), of about the size of the sixteenth of a square inch, should be introduced. If there is chloride of arsenic in the liquid, even up to the l-4000th of a grain, its Apparatus for testing chloride of arsenic obtained by distillation. Portion of tube separated with a deposit of nietallic fcraehifc in the c6ntracted portion. presence will be indicated by a change of colour, and by the deposit of a dark metallic film on the copper. If the liquid should be too much diluted for this purpose, it may be concentrated on the polished copper, and the deposit Avill after a time be apparent. If the quantity of arsenic present is believed to be very small, the surface of copper introduced should be proportionately small. p


[274/1290 b21964944_0274.jp2]

210 TESTING FOR AESENIC The remaining two-tliirds of the distilled liquid, sufficiently diluted, should now be introduced into a Marsh's tube, or into an evolution flask provided with a fimnel tube, the capacity of Avhich must be regulated by the quantity of acid liquid to be examined. The kind of apparatus employed in this stage is represented in the annexed engraving, a the llask, with funnel tube B, and connecting piece c ; the funnel tube should be long enough just to dip below the surface of the acid liquid. The short connecting piece is bent at a right angle, and, like b, is carried through a closely fitting cork in the neck of the flask. This tube should be only long enough to go through the cork, and its open end should be bevelled off to a fine point, so that any vapour which is condensed on it may fall back as liquid into the flask. D is the drying tube containing fragments of chloride of calcium, secured by cotton at both ends. At the flask end of this tube should be placed some well-dried bibulous paper, saturated with acetate of lead. This has the advantage of stopping any gaseous sulphur compound, which may escape from the zinc or acid liquid. E E, a hard and not easily fusible glass tube, fi-ee from lead, contracted in two situations K k', to about the diameter of the tenth of an inch or less, the tube itself having a diameter of from a quarter to three-eighths of an inch. F F are supports made of stout wire, to prevent the tube from falling when heated to redness. G is a test glass to hold one or two drachms of a .strong solution of nitrate of silver, h is a Bunsen's air-gas jet, which gives a stronger heat than a spirit-lamp, although the latter may be used. The arrangement being thus made, the zinc and hydrochloric acid are first tested as to their freedom from arsenic. Portions of pure zinc are placed in the flask A, the parts of the apparatus are then connected, and pure hydrochloric acid, diluted with three or four parts of Avater, is poured into the flask by the funnel B, which operates as a safety valve. Bubbles of air and gas speedily appear in the liquid in G, if the corks fit well, and the Avhole of the arrangements are air-tight. Pure zinc is sometimes but imperfectly acted on by the acid. In this case some clean platinum wire may be wound round the bars of the zinc, and the evolution of hydrogen will be thus accelerated. It is, however, better that the hydrogen should, come off rather slowly. If the materials are pure, the solution of nitrate of silver should undergo no change of colour. The glass o should be placed on a sheet of white paper, whereby the slightest tinge of brown or black is made perceptible. When all the air is ex- pelled from the tube, the flame H may be applied to it at about one inch in front of a Tube appa'.-a,tiis for testing a small Qiiantity contraction of the glass, as indicated in the of liquid containing chloride of arsenic, engraving, and the glass heated to redness. No metallic deposit should take place at K. If the materials are quite pure, the transparency of the glass tube at K will be unchanged. From a quarter to half an hour Avill be sufficient for this experiment. In order to guard against any possible source of error from the adventitious production of solid hydride of arsenic by the reaction of the acid on the zinc, M. Blondlot advises that a small quantity of a solution of sugar, known to be free from arsenic, should be introduced into the flask, by means of the funnel tube B. This, in the presence of an acid, will, according to him, decompose any solid hydride that may have been produced from impurity in the raaterials, and set free arsenuretted hydrogen. If, after this addition, the silver solution remains unchanged in colour, the materials may be regarded


[275/1290 b21964944_0275.jp2]

IN THE TISSUES AND IX ORGANIC SUBSTANCES. 211 as pure. A portion or the whole of the distillate is now added to the acid liquid in the flask by means of the funnel tube. The first indication of the pi-esence of arsenic is manifested by the silver solution becoming gradually brown, and finally black, a dense precipitate of metallic silver resulting from the chemical changes. If it should become very suddenly black and flaky, the presence of sulphur may be suspected. This will be further indicated by a change of colour in the lead paper in D. Pure arsenuretted hydrogen does not alter the colour of this paper. When the silver solution is nearly blackened, the flame may be applied as indicated in the drawing, and kept .steadily at this point. At a red heat, visible in daylight (1200°), arsenu- retted hydrogen is decomposed, and metallic arsenic is deposited; but being a volatile metal it is can-ied onward by the hot current of gas, and forms at first a brown and then a black metallic mirror at K, t. e. in the contracted part of the tube which is cool. When a sufficiently thick deposit is obtained, the flame may be applied to the tube about an inch in front of k'. Thus as many deposits of metallic arsenic may be procured, as there are contractions in the glass tube. The silver solution is allowed to become saturated with the gas. Any escape of the gas from the glass, or by leakage from any of the junctions of the apparatus, is at once indicated by holding near to the spot, filtering paper wetted with nitrate of silver. This is instantly blackened. The glass with the silver solution is removed, the end of the tube well washed, or another tube substituted for e e, and this is allowed to dip into aboiit one drachm of the strongest nitric acid, containing much nitrous acid in a test-glass similar to G, or into a small porcelain capsule. After a time, the acid lo.ses its colour, and the metallic arsenic of the gas is converted into arsenic acid, which may be obtained by evaporation. The fxirther testing of the products is a very simple process. 1. The silver solution contains arsenic in the state of arsenious acid dissolved, with some excess of nitrate of silver. By one or two filtrations it is obtained colourless and clear. A weak solution of ammonia is then added to it, and yellow arse- nite of silver is at once precipitated (see p. 2()>'^). 2. The nitric acid liquid is evaporated to dryness in a small porcelain capsule. One or two drops of water are added to the residue, with a drop of weak ammonia if it should be very acid. A strong solution of nitrate of silver is then added to it: arsenate of silver, of its well-known brick-red colour, is immediately produced. 3. The portions of tube k k' with the metallic deposits in them may be separated by a file, and then hermetically sealed, or, if necessary, one or more of them may be tested by the methods described in a preceding page (see 202). With these results the evidence of the presence of arsenic may be considered as conclusive. The i:»oison is obtained by this process, not only in its pure metallic state, but in the distinct forms of its two well-known oxide.s—arse- nious and arsenic acid. Any demonstration beyond this is superfluous. It will be observed that Reinsch's process is here employed as an adjunct to Marsh's process in an improved form in which the burning of the gas is un- neceasary. The arsenic by distillation is first converted into chloride, the chloride into hydride, and the hydride into the respective oxides. In the different stages of this operation, all other metals, excepting antimony, are en- tirely excluded, and this, under the circumstances, may be easily distinguished from arsenic (see Antimony). The zinc which has been used for one experi- ment is not fitted for use in a second. M. Blondlot has discovered that in the usual method of operating on distilled zinc with hydrochloric or .sulphuric acid, only moderately diluted, a blackish-brown flaky compound is formed which detaches itself from the zinc and floats in the acid liquid. He finds this to l)c arsenic in the form of a .solid and insoluble liydride. Concentrated or diluted


[276/1290 b21964944_0276.jp2]

212 KElNSCll's PKOCESS FOE ABSOEBED AESENIC. acids do not act upon it in the cold, but at a boiling temperature these acids decompose it. Nitric acid and chlorine rapidly dissolve it in the cold. Pleated in a dry tube it is resolved into arsenious acid and water. Nascent hydrogen has no action upon it unless organic matter is present, when it is instantly converted into arsenuretted hydrogen. It commonly attaches itself to the zinc employed in the experiment: by exposure to air it is gradually transformed into arsenious acid; and thus a bar of zinc Avhicli does not show the presence of arsenic on its withdrawal from the acid, may become coated with oxidized arsenic, as a result of exposure, so as to lead to a serious fallacy if used in another experiment. From the investigations of MM. Blondlot and Gaul tier de Claubry, it appears that in the old carbonizing processes by sulphm-ic, nitric, first a brown and then a black metallic mirror at k, i.e. in the contracted pai-t and hydrochloric acids, the arsenic, when in small quantity, was always liable hydride. ('x\nnales d'Hygiene,' 1864, 1, p. 159.) The distillation-process which renders carbonization of the organs unnecessary, gets rid of this difficulty. Dr. Schneider of Vienna was the first to suggest in 1851-2, a method of extracting arsenic from organic matter as a volatile chloride. For this pui-- pose he employed sulphuric acid and common salt. His process is Avell-known on the Continent under the name of Schneider's process. It was described in the 5th edition of my ' Manual of Medical Jurisprudence,' 1854, p. 80. It has the disadvantage of introducing much mineral matter into the substance distilled,—as well as of producing a large amount of froth, and thus em- barrassing the operation. The modification of it above described, in which pure hydrochloric acid alone is required, will be I'ound more convenient in practice. lieinscJis Process alone may be employed for detecting arsenic, deposited as a result of absorption, in the liver, kidneys, or other organs. About four ounces of the recent organ, or more, if necessary, cut into small pieces, may be boiled in a flask in a mixture of one part of pure hydrochloric acid and four of water, until the structure of the organ is broken up. The flask may be of the shape re- presented in the annexed engraving, and either a naked spirit- flame or a sand-bath may be employed. A small glass funnel should be placed in the neck of the flask. This receives and condenses the vapour which falls back into the flask. By this arrangement the boiling may be continued for a long time, without material loss by evaporation. The flask should not be more than half fnll, and heated gently until all froth is ex- Fiask employed in pelled. A slip of fine platinum wire, having a small piece of BubstTncel''' by pi-"'e copper-foil, should be immersed in the liquid when boil- Reinsch's pro- ing. This enables the operator to remove the copper and examine it at intervals, afl^er immersing it in distilled water. If it is much coated with a metallic deposit, larger portions of copper-foil may be successively introduced until the liquid is exhausted. The deposits on the copper may then be tested by the methods described at page 206. It might be supposed that arsenic would escape as chloride in this method of operating, but when hydrochloric acid is diluted with six or eight parts of water, little or no volatile chloride is distilled over. In reference to the recent organs, a larger proportion of acid may be used, because three-fourths of the weight of the animal substance really consist of water. I have not here described the various carbonizing processes Avhich have been recommended by Orfila and other French medical jurists for tlie pur- pose of destroying organic matter. If M. Blondlot's observations are correct-


[277/1290 b21964944_0277.jp2]

DISAFPEAKANCE OF ARSENIC FEOM THE BODY. 213 they have been the source of great and unsuspected errors in medico-legal analyses — sometimes Avithdrawing the poison altogether, and sometimes causing it to reappear under circumstances which were liable to create a fallacy. ('Annales d'PIygiene,' 1864, 1, 152.) It is important, in reference to the presence of absorbed arsenic in the tissues, to observe that it may be found at an early period, when it is either absent or only doubtfully present in other parts. In a case referred to me by Mr. Gell, coroner for Sussex, in May 1854, the deceased, Burton, died within four hoiu'S after he had been attacked with symptoms of poisoning by arsenic. Arsenic Avas found in small quantity in the stomach, duodenum, and rectum. It was also detected in the liver and spleen ; and the proportion found was greater in the latter than in the former organ. In November 1861, a man died from the effects of arsenic in the most acute foi-m, soon after his admission into Guy's Hospital. He had swallowed imknowingly a large dose of the poison in water. His wife left him at 1-30 p. m. quite well: during her ab- sence he swallowed the poison, and on her return at 4, she found him very ill, and suffering from vomiting and purging. He was brought to the hospital, and died soon afterwards. Barely tliree hoiti'S could have elapsed from tlie time at which the poison was taken until his death. There were the usual appearances in the stomach, intense inflammation, especially at the pyloric end; and gritty portions of arsenic mixed with masses of coagulated mucus, and false membranes were ibund in the contents. The intestines were in- flamed, and portions of arsenic were discovered as low as the cagcum. Arsenic was found abundantly in the stomach, and a comparatively large quantity of the poison was detected in half an ounce of the dried liver, as well as in the spleen and kidney. Hence it is obvious that the poison may be rapidly ab- sorbed and copiously deposited within three hours, the quantity thus found depending apparently on the dose taken. In the cases of the Atlee family, referred to me by Mr. Carter, coroner for Surrey, in January 1854, the body of the mother was exhumed after a month. Arsenic was not found in the stomach or bowels, but it was readily detected in a small portion of the liver. The poison had probably been taken several days before death. The fact is of considerable importance in relation to a medical opinion of the presence or absence of poison in a dead body. It is commonly tlie practice to confine an analysis to the stomach and bowels only ; and when no poison is found therein, to report that no poison exists in the body, and to refer death to natural causes. It is clear, however, from the above case, that such an opinion might be er- roneous unless the liver or spleen had undergone a chemical examination. In reserving viscera for analysis, a portion of the liver should therefore always be examined. If the person has lived fifteen or sixteen days after having taken the poison, no trace may be found in the tissues or in any part of the body. Ortila long since expressed this opinion from his experiments on animals; its correctness has been strikingly confirmed by the case of Dr. Alexander, who died in sixteen days from a large dose of arsenic taken by mistake in arrowroot. Dr. Geoghegan, who was deputed to make an analysis of the stomach and other viscera, found no trace of the poison, either absorbed or unabsorbed, in any part of the body which he examined. (See ' Med. Times and Gazette,' April 18, 1857, p. 389.) It is the more necessary that the fact of entire elimination should be remembered, because it has been in- correctly impressed on the public mind that no person can die from poison, except the poison be found by chemical analysis in the body after death. At the trial of William Palmer, and on other public occasions, men of repute as toxicologists have greatly added to the difliculties of medical evidence, and have embarrassed medical witnesses, by affirming that if death had really taken place from poison, it should always be found. If this is untrue with respect


[278/1290 b21964944_0278.jp2]

214 IXFEREXCES FROM THE QUANTITY OF ARSENIC FOUND. to arsenic, it is necessarily untrue with regard to poisons less easy of detection in minute quantities. In the case of the Queen v. Williams (South Wales Circuit, July 1863), INIr. Herapath, of Bristol, confirmed by his evidence the observations of Dr. Geoghegan. A woman was charged with the murder of her husband by ad- ministering to him arsenic. The evidence left no doubt that deceased had siittered from the usual symptoms of poisoning, namely, inflammation of the stomach and bowels, numbness of the limbs, and other symptoms. For some days before the deceased's death, owing to his food having been prepared for liim by his daughter, the symptoms abated; but he vdtimately died from ex- haustion. Mr. Herapath examined the viscera, and found no arsenic. Neither in his reading nor in his experience had he known arsenic to have been detected fifteen days after its administration. As no poison was discovered in the body, the prisoner was acquitted of the charge of murder, but found guilty of the intent. ('Lancet,' July 11, 18G3, p. 47.) In the case of Sovffla7'd, H large dose of arsenic had been taken ; but according to M. Legroux, no trace of the poison existed in the stomach or in the ulcerated portions of the bowels. (' Union Medicale,' June 30, 1850.) When arsenic is discovered in the stomach mixed with food, it does not necessarily follow that it has been administered in that particular article of food. Should the person liave par- taken of food such as milk or gruel, subsequently to the swallowing of arsenic, these fluids will necessarily acquire an arsenical impregnation from the poison already contained in the stomach. The patients may have taken the arsenic in one kind of food, when another and an innocent description of food might thus inadvertently be pronounced to have been the vehicle. (See on this point the case of Ann Mevritt, ' London Med. Gaz.,' Aug. 16, 1850, vol. 46, p. 291.) It need hardly be observed that the quantity of arsenic found in the stomach or other organs can convey no accurate idea of the quantity actually taken by the deceased, since more or less of the poison may have been removed by violent vomiting and purging as well as by absorption and elimination. A large quantity i'ound in the stomach or bowels indicates a large dose; but the finding of a small quantity does not prove that the dose was small. NotAvith- standing these very obvious causes for the removal of a poison from the body, there is a strong prejudice among lawyers that the chemical evidence is defec- tive unless the quantity found is sufficient to cause death. It would be just as reasonable, in a case in Avhich a man has been killed by a discharge of small shot, to insist upon a faihue of proof of the cause of death, because only a single pellet has been found in the body. The value of chemical evidence does not depend on the discovery of any particular quantiti/ of poison in the stomach,—it is merely necesstiry that the evidence of its presence should be clear, distinct, conclusive, and stitisfactory. At the same time, a reasonable ol)jection may be taken to a dogmatic reliance upon the alleged discovery in a dead body, of minute fractional portions of a grain; and, considering the great liability to fallacy from the accidental presence of arsenic in the articles xised, the chemical evidence in the French case of Madame Laffai-ge (ISAO), in which the whole quantity discovered in the dead body was stated to be the hundred and thirtieth part of a grain, was of a most unsatisfactory kind, and should have been rejected by the Court. No man with any respect for his character, or for the common sense of a jury, would base chemical evidence on the thousandth, or less than the thousandth, part of a grain of poison in a case of life and death: although, for the purpose of procurin"- the acquittal of a criminal, he might make use of his alleged power to detect this, or even a smaller quantity. It has been supposed that the quantity of arsenic found in the stomach and bowels may throw a light on the question, whethci- the poison had been tak en


[279/1290 b21964944_0279.jp2]

A LAEGE QUANTITY FOUND IN THE BODY. 215 voluntarily with the intention of committing suicide, or whether it had been criminally admiiiistered by another; i. e. supposing the evidence to establish that there could have been only one act of administration. There is no doubt that a much larger dose may be taken by a suicide than could be secretly administered by a murderer; and thus, if a large quantity is found in the stomach, it is supposed to furnish a presumption in favour of suicide and against murder. Suicides have been known to take as much as two table- spoonfuls, or one thousand grains, of arsenic. How nuich may remain in a dead body must, however, depend on the amount of vomiting and purging, and the length of time the person survives. In one case of murder by poison I Ibund in the stomach, on the exhumation of a body, eighteen months after death, twenty grains of arsenic. In the case of VAngeUer {Reg. v. Madeline Smith, Ed. High Court of Justiciary, June and July, 1857), Dr. Penny stated in evidence that the quantity of arsenic Avhich he found in the stomach and contents of the deceased amounted to eighty-eight grains, and that some part of this was in hard, gritty, colourless, crystalline particles. As there was arsenic in the contents of the intestines, and there had been vomiting and purging, it is obvious that the deceased must have taken a very large dose of the poison; and it was one of the suggested difficalties of this case, to deter- mine how the deceased could have taken the poison is so large a quantity unknowingly. The quantity found, however, amounted to no more than half a teaspoouful; and admitting that one half of the dose taken had been ejected, the question resolves itself into this : whether a teaspoonful of arsenic might not have been homicidally adrainistei-ed in chocolate, gruel, or some liquid, or in a state of admixture with solid food (cake). Although it is unusual to find half a teaspoonful of arsenic remaining in the stomach in a case of Jiomicidal administration, it appears to me impossible to admit that this fact is inconsistent Avith an act of murder. A man half intoxicated might be thus poisoned; and if death took place in a few hours, even a larger quantity than that which was here found might remain in the stomach. Dr. Christison has now set this question at rest by the publication of a case in which a man was homicidally destroyed by arsenic, and the (quantity found in the stomach after death was from ninety to one hundred grains. The man had survived from five to seven hours, and there had been frequent vomiting of a yellowish or greenish coloured liquid during this period. The arsenic was administered in whiskey-punch with sugar, and it was kept in suspension by constant stirring. ('Ed. Monthly Med. Journal,' December, 1857, p. 481.) In lieqina v. Dodds, tried at the Lincoln Assizes in December, 18GU, the prisoner was charged with administering arsenic to deceased with intent to murder. The quantity stated to have been found in the stomach by the medical witnesses was one hundred and fifty grains. There was no reason to suppose that he had taken the poison with suicidal intention; but, on the contrary, there was strong evidence to presume that it had been administered to him with a design to destroy life. I am indebted to Mr. Justice Willes for a note on a similar case. A woman named Alice Heivitt was tried before him {Reg. v. Hewitt or Holt) at the Chester Winter Assizes, 18G3, and convicted of poisoning her mother with arsenic in the month of March preceding. Although the symptoms of irritant poisoning were very clearly marked, a medical man who attended her certified the cause of death as gastro-enteritis. Eleven weeks after the burial of the deceased, the body was exhumed and examined. It was proved that shortly before her mother's death, the prisoner had purchased a quarter of a pound of arsenic for threepence, and there was clear evidence of administration,—a large dose 'having been given to the deceased in liquid shortly before her death. The inspection revealed the extraordinary fact that 154 grains of solid arsenic


[280/1290 b21964944_0280.jp2]

rOISONING BY ARSEMTE OF TOTASII. 216 Avere found in the stomach alone. It had been partially converted into sulphide as a result of putrefactive changes, and it was observed that the liver, omentum, and right side of the heart were thickly painted with yellow sulphide of arsenic. In reference to this colouration, 1 have in one instance seen the front of the spinal column behind the stomach tinged of a deep yellow from arsenic which had escaped through the coats of this organ. If a person has died with arsenic in the body, there is scarcely any limit to the period at which it may be detected. In the cases of two children ex- amined by Mr. Herapath, in July 1849, the poison Avas discovered in the remains of the dead bodies after eight years' interment; in another case by Dr. Glover after twelve years ('Lancet,' July 9, 1853, p. 41): and in a remarkable instance which occurred to Dr. Webster, of Boston, it was dis- covered in the remains of a body, aiter fourteen years' burial in a tomb. It has been sought for, and not found, at much shorter periods after death when there Avas a very strong suspicion that the poison had been taken : but it is highly probable that in these cases there Avas little or no arsenic in the bodies at the time of death. The longer a person has survived after taking this poison, the less probable is it, cceteris ])aribus, that arsenic will be found in the remains. With respect to its detection in the stomach and boAvels, if the A^omiting and purging have been violent and the person has survived some days, none may be ibund. It is singular, hoAvever, to notice Avith what tenacity the mineral occasionally adheres to the mucous membrane in spite of vomiting and purging. In the case of the Duke of Praslin^ who died in six days from a large dose of arsenic, some portion Avas still found in the intes- tines (' Ann. d'Hygiene,' 1847, p. 402) ; and in a case which was the subject of a criminal trial at the Leicester Autumn Assizes in 1860 {Begina v. Holmes), Mr. Lankester informed me that arsenic Avas detected in the intestines, although the deceased had survived the effects of a large dose for seven days, and had suftered from the usual symptoms. The condition of the arsenic found in a dead stomach should be specially noticed. A Avitness should be prepared to say Avhether it is in fine poAvder or coarse fragments ; Avhether it is mixed Avith soot or indigo, or Avhether it is in the ordinary state of white arsenic. These points may be material as evi- dence in reference to proof of possession, of purchase, or administration. Arsenic is not a normal constituent of the body. Under no circumstances is it found in the tissues after death, except in cases in Avliich it has been taken by or administered to the deceased. Arsenite of Potash. Liquor Arsenicalis. (Fowler's Solution.) Symptorns and Appearances.—There is, so far as I know, only one case recorded in Avhich this solution has destroyed life. A Avoman took half an ounce (= two grains of arsenic) in divided doses, during a period of five days, and died from the effects. There Avas no vomiting or purgino-, but after death the stomach and intestines Avere found inflamed ('Provincial Journal,' June 28, 1848, p. 347.) A mixture of ai-senic, soft soap, and tar-water is largely used in agricultural districts for killing the fly in sheep. This has caused death, under the usual symptoms of arsenical poisoning, in at least tAvo instances. There is no doubt that a mixture of this kind is injurious to sheep unless very carefully used. In Black v. Elliott (Newcastle Assizes, Feb., 1859), damages were claimed for the loss of 850 sheep, sjiid to have been poisoned by dinpino- them in an arsemcal mixture of tliis description. The jury Ibund a verdict for the plaintiff, Avith 1,400/. damages. Analysis.—liW^ solution has the odour of tincture of lavender, is of a


[281/1290 b21964944_0281.jp2]

roisoxiNG BY sciieele's green. 217 reddish colouj", and has an alkaline reaction. One fluid ounce of it contains four grains of arsenious acid. It gives at once a green precipitate (arsenite of copper) with the sulj^hate of copper, and a yellow precipitate with nitrate of silver. Acidulated with hydrochloric acid, and treated Avith a current of sulphuretted hydi'Ogen gas, it yields a yellow sulphide; and when boiled with this acid and copper, a deposit is obtained which readily furnishes octahedral crystals of arsenious acid. The Arsenite of Soda is as poisonous as the arsenite of potash. In Decem- ber, 1857, three hundred and forty children belonging to an Industrial school near London were poisoned by this compound. It had been incautiously used for cleansing a steam-boiler, and had thus become mixed with the hot water Avhich was drawn for the breakfasts of the children. The dose of arsenic taken by each child I found to be about one grain. All recovered, although some suffered severely. (See ' On Poisons,' 2nd ed. p. 378.) In the winter of 1863 a man died under the symj)toms of acute poisoning by arsenic, owing to his having drunk beer out of a pot which had contained this patent cleansing liquid I Flji-Water is a name applied to solutions of various arsenical compounds in water. Mixtures of this kind are formed by dissolving one part of the arsenite of soda or potash and two parts of sugar in twenty parts of Avater. Paper soaked in this solution, and dried, is used for poisoning flies; and perhaps this is the safest form in which arsenic can be used lor such a purpose. A case of poisoning by fly-water, in which two grains and a half of arsenious acid destroyed the life of an adult in thirty-six hours, will be found reported in the 'Medical Gazette' (vol. 39, p. IIG). Fly-powder is a dark coloured mixture of metallic arsenic and arsenious acid. The latter gives to it poisonous properties. Arsenite of Copper. Scheele's Green. Emerald Green. This is the only metallic arsenite which is met with in commerce and the arts, and it constitutes, wholly or in part, a great variety of green pigments, known as Emerald gi-een (aceto arsenite of copper) employed for paper- hangings, mineral green, Brunswick, Schweinfurt, or Vienna green. It is thus found in the form of oil-paint in cakes, in boxes of water colours, spread over confectionery, in wafers, in adhesive envelopes, and lastly and most abundantly, in various kinds of gi-een decorative papers used for covering the walls of sitting and bedrooms. Symptoms and Effects.—Although the arsenite of copper is insoluble in water, it is suflSciently soluble in the acid mucous fluids of the .stomach to be' taken up by the absorbents, and carried as a poison into the blood. A boy, aged three years, swallowed a small capsule of Scheele's green, used by his father as a pigment. In half an hour he complained of violent colic : there Avas frequent vomiting, Avith purging, cold SAveats, intense thirst, and retraction of the parietes of the abdomen. The mouth and throat were stained of a deep green colour. Hydrated sesquioxide of iron was given: in about an hour the vomiting ceased, and soon afterAvards the thirst and pain in the abdomen abated. The next morning the child Avas Avell. In another case a child, a year old, ate several pieces of a cake of arsenite of copper used i'ov colours. There was immediate vomiting of a liquid containing green-coloured particles of the arsenite, but there Avere no other urgent symptoms. White of egg, Avith sugared Avater, was given to it. After a short time the child became pale and complained of pain in the abdomen: the pulse was frequent, the skin cold, and there was gi-eat depression. Copious purging folIoAved, soon after Avhich the child recovered. (Galtier, vol. 1, p. G36.) In the cases of tAvo children poisoned by confectionery coloured with thi.s substance, the


[282/1290 b21964944_0282.jp2]

XOXIOtJS EFFECTS OF ARSENICAL GREEX. 218 chief symptom was incessant vomiting of a light green-coloured liquid, resembling bile diluted with water. Mr. Bully, of Reading, who reports these cases ('Medical Times,' April 28, 1849, page 507), describes the symptoms as severe, although the quantity of poison swallowed was small. Under the use of an emetic of ipecacuanha, the children recovered. Dr. Kose met with a case similar in its details. (' Lancet,' March 5, 1859, p. 237.) (See also 'Guy's Hosp. Reports,' Oct., 1850, p. 218; 'Medical Gazette, vol.43, p. 304; 'Edinburgh Monthly Journal,' July, 1851, p. 1; and 'Lancet,' March 5, 1859, p. 237.) In two cases which I examined in January, 1853, a small quantity of a confectionery ornament, coloured with arsenite of copper, proved fatal to two children. The symptoms and appear- ances were those of poisoning by arsenious acid. The quantity taken could not have been above two or three grains. The children picked up the orna- ment in the street and shared it between them. The poison was spread over a layer of sugar I In a case which was the subject of a criminal trial, this substance Avas proved to have caused the death of a gentleman by reason of its Iiaving been employed to give a rich green colour to some blanc-mange served at a public dinner:—the person who employed it considering that emerald or mineral green was nothing more than an extract of spinach ! It led to death under the usual symptoms, and the parties Avere convicted of manslaughter and sentenced to imprisonment. {Seg. y. Franklin and BandaU, Northampton Summer Assizes, 1848.) Most of the colours used Tor confectionery are of a poisonous nature : the pink colour given by cochineal or madder is the only one which can be regarded as innocent. Among other uses of this noxious compound, Ave find it employed for imparting a bright green colour to the shelves of bakers' and green-grocers' shops. An incident Avhich occurred to myself Avill shoAv that food may thus acquire an arsenical impregnation. SeA'eral loaves of bread Avere supplied to me, having upon the undercrust a quantity of green-coloured pigment, Avhich on analysis turned out to be arsenite of copper, containing about fifty per cent, of arsenic ! On inquiry, I found that the baker had recently painted the shelves of his shop Avith this pigment, and the hot loaves placed upon them had taken off a portion of the arsenical paint. It is easy to con- ceive that an accident of this kind, if undetected, might lead to serious results, and perhaps to erroneous suspicions. (' Medical Times and Gazette,' April, 1854, p. 326.) Another alleged form of poisoning by this substance, Avhich has attracted some attention, is as it exists in the state of vapour or fine dust applied to the membrane of the lungs, or in the state of poAvdcr, applied to the skin. A young man, after having been engaged for nine days in printing Avith an arsenical green pigment, Avas seized with irritation and Avatery discharge irom the nose, sAvelUng of the lips and nostrils, and headache. The next day he experienced severe colic, and great muscular Aveakness: but these symptoms disappeared in about eight days. It is probable that, in this case, the arsenite of copper had been taken into the body through the mucous membrane of the lungs in the state of fine powder. According to M. Bouchardat ('Annuaire de Therapeutique,' 1846, p. 209), the workmen Avho handle the emerald-green in making Avall-papers are subject to serioixs disorders of health. They some- times suffer from eruptions of the skin,— one of the local effects of poisoning by arsenic (see 'Assoc. Med. Journal,' 1856, Sept. 6, p. 757, and Sept. 20, p. 810), Avith oedema (AA-atery sAvelling) of the face, and boils frequently forming in the scrotum. There is irritation Avith discharge of fluid from the mucous mem- brane of the nose, and abundant salivation. In the more advanced stage there are colicky pains, headache, and prostration of strength. See ' Annales


[283/1290 b21964944_0283.jp2]

ARSEKICAL WALL-PAPERS. 219 d'Hygiene,' 1847, vol. 2, p. 56 ; a p;iper by Dr. Vernois, 1859, vol. 2, pp. 107, 319; and Casper's 'Vierteljalirschrift,' 1859, vol. 2, p. 8 ; and'Journal de Cliimie,' Juillet, 1858, pp. 394, 397. Wall-papera covered with the loosely-adhering aceto-arsenite of copper are, from tlieir cheapness as well as their brightness of colour, extensively used in dwellings. This pigment contains fifty-nine per c^t. of arsenic, and from some of these papers in the unglazed state, the noxious material may be easily scraped or removed by friction. A square foot may yield from twenty-eight to seventy grains of the arsenical compound, and in rooms exposing five or six hundred square feet, arsenic is thus liable to be distributed in the state of a fine dust or powder through the air of a room. I have detected this poi- sonous dust on books, pictures, lurniture, and projecting cornices in rooms thus papered. "Workmen who hang these papers or who strip them off the walls, suffer from symptoms referable only to the action of arsenic. One of my friends who had his library papered with an arsenicated wall-paper, suf- fered severely from symptoms of arsenical poisoning, which came on after he had been occupied in dusting his books. I examined the dust, and found therein a well-marked quantity of arsenic. The Symptoms produced are of a uniform character, showing their origin from a common cause. They are as follows :—Dryness and imtation of the throat with cough, irritation of the mucous membrane of the eyes and nos- trils, dry cough, languor, headache, loss of appetite, nausea, colicky pains, luimbness, cramp, irritability of the bowels, attended with mucous discharges, great prostration of strength, a feverish condition, and wasting of the body. These symptoms may not all present themselves in any one case; they are derived from the examination of numerous cases Avhich have been re- ferred to me. No suspicion of the cause had been entertained until all ordi- nary treatment failed to impart relief, and an analysis of the paper had been made. The connection of the symptoms with this cause appears to have been in some instances clearly established by the fact that after the removal of the paper, especially from bedrooms, the symptoms have disappeared. It is, how- ever, proper to observe that, as in reference to the manufacture of white lead, comparatively few of those who are exposed, suffer from symptoms of poisoning. Various deaths, chiefly among children, from the use of this paper are now recorded ; and it is probable that to the noxious practice of covei-ing the walls of om- sitting and bedrooms with arsenic, many insidious cases of illness and chronic disease may be referred. Mr. Orton has lately published in the 'Lon- don Medical Review' some remarks on this form of poisoning, with cases de- monstrating the danger and fatality arising from the use of the paper. This noxious arsenical compound is also much used for colouring artificial flowers, wreaths, and tarletan dresses. Paper used for adhesive envelopes, for wrapping confectionery, children's food, isinglass, &c., is also frequently coloured with it. So long as the manufacture of this paper is permitted, it is useless to pass any law for restricting the sale of poison. Analysis.—For the chemical characters of Scheele's Green, see page 204. The wall-paper pigment called Emerald Green is a mixture of arsenite and acetate of copper. The colour is most intense, even by candle-light. The pre- sence of arsenic in this compound may be easily detected by all the tests for arsenic (page 201); but the following is a simple method which admits of speedy application. A slip of the suspected paper should be soaked in a moderately- strong solution of ammonia. The colom- is removed, and the blue ammoniuret of copper is formed and dissolved in a few minutes. Tliis result establishes only the presence of a compound of copper soluble in ammonia. If the am- monia does not become blue there is no arsenite present: if it does become blue, a large crystal of nitrate of silver must be placed in a wliite saucer and


[284/1290 b21964944_0284.jp2]

ARSENIC ACID. ORriMENT. 220 a small portion of tlie blue liquid poured over it. The presence of arsenic is revealed by the production of yellow arsenite of silver over the surface of the crystal (page 203). Arsenic Acid. Alkaline Arsenates. Arsenic acid is an artfticial product almost entirely confined to the chemical laboratory. Orfila states that it is a more powerful poison than arsenious acid, but he does not adduce any instance in support of this opinion. I have not been able to find any case of poisoning by it in the human subject. Dr. Glover ascertained that four grains of the acid, dissolved in two drachms of Avater, and introduced into the stomach of a rabbit, killed the animal in four hours, with the symptoms of irritant poisoning, and an affection of the nervous system. ('Ed. Med. and Surg. Jour.,'voh 58, p. 121.) Analysis.—Arsenic acid is a white uncrystalline deliquescent solid. 1. It is not entirely volatilized when heated on platinum foil in the flame of a lamp. 2. It is very soluble in water, forming a highly acid solution. 3. It is pre- cipitated of a brick-red colour by nitrate or the ammonio-nitrate of silver. In these characters it differs from arsenious acid. 4. It yields readily an arsenical sublimate Avhen heated Avith charcoal. 5. It yields deposits by Reinsch's process (page 205), but less readily than arsenious acid. The arsenates of potash and soda must be regarded as active poisons, al- though there are but few instances on record in Avhich life has been destroyed by them. Dr. Christison states that, in the course of his reading, he has met Avith only two reported cases of poisoning by arsenate of potash. ( Op. cit. 284.) The tests are the same as for arsenic acid. A coarse sort of blotting-paper, soaked in a solution of arsenate of potash, is extensively sold under the name of '■Papier Moure.'' It has been erroneously represented that the substance with Avhich it is impreirnated, is not poisonous to human beings. (See 'Lancet,' Feb. 11, 1860 ; also '"Ann. d'Hyg.' 1860, voL 1, p. 292.) Sulphides, or Sulphurets of Arsenic. Orpiment. Orpiment or Yellow Arsenic oavcs its poisonous properties to the presence of a variable proportion of arsenious acid, sometimes amounting to as much as 30 per cent, of its Aveight. Orpiment is much employed in the arts, in painting, dyeing, paper-staining, and even in the colouring of toys and sweetmeats for children, but is not often used as a poison ! In December 1859 six persons suffered from the usual symptoms of poisoning by arsenic, owing to their having eaten Bath huns. It Avas found that a confectioner at Clifton had used, as he supposed, chromate of lead to give the buns a rich yellow colour, and make them saleable; but the druggist to Avhom he applied had ignorantly supplied him Avith orpiment. This Avholesale system of poisoning is one of the attendant evils of adulterating articles of food. The Bradford lozenge cases (Nov. 1858) furnish a remarkable instance of the impunity attendant upon acts of this kind. A confectioner, intending to adulterate lozenges Avith plaster of Paris, mixed Avith them a quantity of Avhite arsenic which had been supplied to him through mistake. I am in- formed that more than 200 persons partook of these poisoned lozenges, and suffered the usual effects. Seventeen persons died : twelve from acute poi- soning, and five from the secondary effects. A trial took place, but the laAv could not fix the responsibility for the act upon any person. ^ Symptoms and Appearances.—Orpiment produces symptoms and appearances similar to those caused by arsenious acid ; but the dose required to destroy life vanes according to the proportion of arsenious acid Avith Avhich it happens to be mixed. This is not a common form of poisoning; the yellow colour of the


[285/1290 b21964944_0285.jp2]

OliriMENT. CllLOllIDE OF ARSENIC. poison would lead to siispicion : but by reason of this colour, orpiment may be given or taken, by mistake, fof mustard or turmeric. In a case Avhich occurred to Dr. Jochner, two persons partook of some porridge, in wliicli orpiment had been put, by mistake, for turmeric. They sufFered from continual vomiting, burning pain in the stomach, and collapse. One, an old man, di(!d in twenty- two hours; the other, a boy, recovered. On inspection, there was violent inflammation of the gullet and stomach, the mucous coat of the latter being softened and thickened. There was a sphacelated spot, one inch in diameter, in the gullet; and another in the stomach, three inches in extent. (Wharton and Stille,' Med. Jur.' 434.) According to Dr. Chevers (' Med. Jur. for India,' p. 74), orpiment is much used in India both as a medicine and as a poison. He refers to eight instances in which this poison was found, either in food, or in the stomachs of persons who had died under symptoms of irritant poisoning. Orpiment and realgar (another sulphide) are sold openly in India, and are used as depilatories. Orpiment has been known to cause death by external appli- cation as a depilatory (see ' Annales d'Hygiene,' 1834, 459). Anab/sis.—The powdered sulphide yields a solution of arsenious acid on boiling it in water acidulated with hydrochloric acid. It readily gives the well-known sublimates of metallic arsenic, both with soda-flux and ferrocya- nide of potassium (see page 202). Organic mixtures.—The sulphide being insoluble in water, it is in general easily separated mechanically by allowing the matters mixed with it to become dry upon bibulous paper. If it cannot be separated mechanically, the organic matter suspected to contain it should be dried and boiled with the strongest nitric acid to dryness, until it is de- stroyed. Any sulphide will then be found under the form of arsenic acid, soluble in water (see page 219). In Eeg. v. Sturt (Lewes Lent Assizes, 1863), a novel question arose re- specting this compound. There was some reason to believe that the deceased woman had died from the effects of arsenic administered in confectionery. White arsenic was found in the stomach, and a question was put by the learned judge, as well as by the counsel for the prisoner, whether the confectioner might not have used yellow arsenic by mistake in order to give a colour, and this yellow arsenic have been converted in the deceased's body in twenty-four hours into white. It need hardly be remarked that the yellow colour is an essential character of orpiment. White may be converted into yellow arsenic in the dead body, but yellow cannot be spontaneously changed into white arsenic. Chloride of Arsenic. This is a solution of arsenic in diluted hydrochloric acid. It was formerly used in pharmacy, but is now excluded. It contains one grain and a half of arsenious acid in one fluid ounce, which is equal to the small proportion of three-sixteenths of a grain to a fluid drachm. Mr. Phillips states that it is a highly poisonous preparation, and from a case which I saw in Guy's Hospital in May 1857, this statement is confirmed. An adult female took, in three doses, thirty minims over a period of twenty-four hours. The quantity of arsenic thus taken was not more than the tenth part of a grain, and yet the symptoms wliich followed were of a severe kind, resembling those of chronic poisoning. These were constriction of the throat, pain and irritation of the stomach and bowels, tingling and numbness of the hands and feet, loss of muscular power, and a feeling of extreme depression. The medicine (a poison) was withdrawn, and the patient slowly recovered. It seems that she had not taken arsenic previously, and there was no evidence of the existence of a peculiar susceptibility to the effects of arsenic. The quantity taken was very small to i^roduce such alarming eflfects. The usual medicinal dose of this solution was from three to ten minims.


[286/1290 b21964944_0286.jp2]

rOlSONIXG BY MERCURY. Ahsenurictted Hydrogen. This is a gaseous poison of arsenic, producing, when respii-ed in small quantity, very serious effects upon the system. It has ah-eady occasioned death in at least four instances. See (' On Poisons.') One of them is com- paratively recent. (' Chemical News,' Dec. 26, 1863, p. 307.) CHAPTER 19. POISONING BY MERCURY CORROSIVE SUBLIMATE SYMPTOMS—CHRONIC POISONING FATAL DOSE—APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH—PERIOD AT WHICH DEATH TAKES PLACE CHEMICAL ANALYSIS—PROCESS FOR MERCURY IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS — WHITE AND RED PRECIPITATES OTHER COMPOUNDS. Metallic Mercury is not regarded as a poison. A large quantity of it in the fluid state may be swallowed without affecting healtli, or Avithout causing more uneasiness than that which may arise from its great weight. It rapidly passes through the bowels. If the mercury is breathed or swallowed in a state of vapour, or if applied to the skin or mucous membrane in a state of extreme mechanical division, in Avhich state it appears to be easily susceptible of oxidation, it is liable to be absorbed, and to produce a poisonous action on the body. The effects are principally manifested by salivation, by trembling and involuntary motions of the limbs, loss of appetite, and emaciation. These symptoms are occasionally seen in workmen engaged in trades, in which they are exposed to the inhala- tion of mercurial vapours. Blue pill and Mercurial ointment are preparations in which mercury is thus finely reduced, and probably, as in the mixture of mercury and chalk, more or less oxidized. A case in which a female is reported to have died from taking excessive doses of blue pill is reported in the ' Medical Times and Gazette,' vol. 1, 1863, p. 446. Blue or mercui-ial ointment, which contains nearly half its weight of mercury, has attracted some attention lately by reason of its poisonous effects on cattle. It is employed for the purpose of dressing sheep in place of arsenic, and so much has been used in Lincolnshire, that Mr. Gamgee informs me, twenty-five tons of this ointment had been sold in one year by a druggist in Boston chiefly to farmers. In March 1863 I was considted in reference to the death of many sheep belonging to a farmer near Stamford; it was supposed that the blue ointment employed was not pure, but that it contained corrosive sublimate or some other deadly poison. The sheep were quite healthy before the ointment was applied, as a dressing for the fly; but soon afterwards, they began to die at the rate of six per diem, until upwards of forty were lost. The chief symptoms preceding death Averc short breathing with a peculiar grunt indicative of pain, and the heads of the animals drooped to the ground. On inspection the lungs were generally found congested. On analysis the ointment was found quite pure. Mr. Gamgee informs me that he has been consulted in cases in which sheep have been poisoned by repeated dressings Avith blue ointment; and he affirms that ruminants are more easily killed by such an application than other animals. He found that sheep thus poisoned Avith mercury, had been sent for sale to the dead-meat markets in London, and that they had realized more money than sound mutton sold in the county of Lincoln. I aaree with him, that this practice of inunction Avith mercury should be suppressed : it is not only injurious to cattle, but is often an unsuspected source of noxious food to human beings. Mercury Avith chalk is commonly regarded as an innocent medicinal compound of the metal; but if long kept and exposed to light a


[287/1290 b21964944_0287.jp2]

223 COIIRjOSIVE SUBLLMATE. SYiMPTOiMF. portion ol" the mercury passes to the highest state of oxidation, and thus produces a poisonous effect upon the system. This may account for the severe symptoms which have sometimes resulted from this preparation in medicinal doses. Drs. Duncan and Seely, who have investigated the changes, state that in one specimen which should have contained 37"5 parts of metallic mercury, 4'05 parts had become converted into the black oxide, and 22*25 parts into red oxide. Corrosive Sublimate.—Tliis substance has received a variety of chemical names. It has been at various times called Oxymuriate, Chloride, Bichloride, and Perchloride of Mercury. To prevent any confusion from scientific chemical nomenclature, the old and popular name of Corrosive Sublimate, expressing the principal properties of the substance, is here retained. It is commonly seen under the form of heavy crystalline masses, or of a white crystalline powder. Its taste is powerfiilly auirtere and metallic, so that no poisonous quantity of it could be easily SAvallowed, without the person becoming immediately aware of it. It is very soluble in water, hot or cold, and speedily sinks in it, in which properties it differs strikingly from arsenic. I have found by experiment that one hundred grains of a cold saturated solution hold dissolved, at a maximum, ten grains of corrosive sublimate; and it is stated by most chemists that two parts of boiling water (212°) will dissolve one part of the poison. It is also readily dissolved by alcohol and ether. Symptoms.—The symptoms produced by corrosive sublimate generally come on immediately or within a few mimites afler the poison has been swallowed. In the first place there is perceived a strong metallic taste in the mouth, often described as a coppery taste ; and there is, during the act of swallowing, a sense of constriction almost amoimting to suffocation, with burning heat in the throat, extendins: downwards to the stomach. In a few minutes violent pain is felt in the abdomen, especially in the region of the stomach, which is increased by pressure. Pain in the abdomen has been sometimes wholly absent. There is nausea, with frequent vomiting of long stringy masses of white mucus, mixed with blood; and this is followed by profuse purging. The countenance is sometimes swollen and flushed, in other cases it has been pale and anxious. The pulse is small, frequent, and irregular, and is scarcely perceptible when the symptoms become aggravated. The tongue is white and shrivelled,—the skin cold and clammy, the respiration difficult; and death is commonly preceded by fliinting, convulsions, or general insensibility. The external parts of the mouth, when examined, are swollen, and sometimes present an appearance as if the cavity had been washed with a solution of nitrate of silver: the lips are often sAvollen. Suppression of urine has also been frequently noticed among the symptoms. It existed in a wcU-mai'ked case of poisoning by this substance, at Guy's Hospital:—the patient lived four days, but did not pass any urine during the whole of this time. (Guy's Hospital Reports, April, 1844, p. 24.) This symptom Avas observed in a case reported by Dr. Wegeler (Casper's Wochenschrift, Jan. 10, 1846, p. 30), in which a youth, aet. 17, swallowed three drachms of this poison, and died on the sixth day. During the last three days, no urine was secreted. The case was otherwise remarkable from the fact, that no pain was expe- rienced on pressure of the abdomen, and that the pulse underwent no change until shortly before death. In another case, reported by Dr. Ilerapath, in which a scruple of corrosive sublimate in solution was swallowed, suppression of urine and salivation came on on the third day, and the patient died on the ninth day. ('Lancet,' Dec. 13 and 27,1845, pp. 650, 698.) In a case observed by Mr. Morris, the quantity of urine secreted was small, and it produced a scalding pain when voided. (' Prov. Med. Jour.' Nov. 18, 1843, p. 126.) In_ this instance there was no purging.


[288/1290 b21964944_0288.jp2]

CORROSIVE SUBLIMATE. APPEARANCES. 224 The external application of corrosive sublimate to tumors or ulcers may destroy life with all the usual symptoms of acute mercurial poisoning. At tlie Winchester Lent Assizes, 1859 (Eer/. v. Crook), a quack was convicted of inanslaughtcr by applying corrosive sublimate in powder to a cancerous tumour in the face of deceased. The man suffered from the usual symptoms. After death the bowels were found extensively inflamed and ulcerated. Mr. May, of Reading, detected corrosive sublimate in the diseased part. This poison differs from arsenic: 1, in having a well-marked taste; 2, in producing violent symptoms in a few minutes; and 3, in the fact that the evacuations are more frequently mixed Avith blood. The symptoms pro- duced by corrosive sublimate, in the first instance, resemble those of cholera; if the individual should survive several days, they are more like those of dysentery,—violent straining, and mucous discharges mixed with blood, being very fi-equently observed. Sloio or chronic Poisoning.—The symptoms are much modified Avhen the poison is taken in small doses at intervals for some days or weeks. There are colicky pains with nausea, vomiting, general uneasiness, and depression. The salivary glands become inflamed and painful; the tongue and gums are red and swollen, sometimes ulcerated, and there is foetor of the breath. A deep blue line, like that observed in poisoning by lead, is sometimes found around the edges of the gums. The patient experiences difficulty of swallowing and breathing. The constitutional effects are indicated by looseness of the boAvels, difficulty of breathing, spitting of blood, cough, general trembling or convul- sive movements of the limbs, and palsy, with slow fever and emaciation, under which the patient sinks. One of the most marked effects of slow or chronic poisoning by mercurial preparations is salivation^ or ptyalism, indi- cated by an increased flow of saliva. This is by no means a necessary symptom in cases of acute poisoning by corrosive sublimate, but it not unfrequently shows itself about the second or third day. In some instances the patient dies too rapidly for this effect to follow; but even Avhen he survives some days, salivation is not always observed. In placing reliance upon this symptom, it must be remembered that salivation may arise from a variety of causes irrespective of the use of mercury. Appearances after Death.—These, as in the case of arsenic, are chiefly confined to the alimentary canal. Corrosive sublimate, however, affects both the mouth and throat; the mucous membrane is softened, of a white or bluish grey colour, and sometimes inflamed ; that lining the gullet is similarly affected, and partly corroded and softened. The mucous membrane of the stomach is more or less inflamed, sometimes in patches; and there are masses of black extravasated blood found beneath it. Occasionally it has a slate- grey colour and the mucous coat beneath may be found reddened. A case occurred in Guy's Hospital, in Avhich the mucous membrane was simply inflamed: it much resembled the condition presented in cases of arsenical poisoning. The coats of the stomach are sometimes corroded, and so much softened that they cannot be removed from the body without laceration. Similar appearances have been met with in the small and large intestines, especially in the cajcum. In a case reported by Dr. Herapath, in which a scruple Avas taken, and death occurred on the ninth day, the mucous mem- brane of the stomach was softened, but there were no well-marked appearances of the action of the poison on this organ. The ceecum had been the seat of the mo.st violent inflammation, the whole surface being of a deep black-red colour, and there were patches of sloughing in the coats. ('Lancet,' Dec, 27, 1845, p. 700.) In a case which occurred to Dr. Thomson, of Perth, in which a man died forty hours after having swallowed two drachms of corrosive sublimate in powder, the mucous membrane of the stomach, duodenum, upper


[289/1290 b21964944_0289.jp2]

CORROSIVE SUBLIMATE. FATAL DOSE. portion of the ileum, and parts of the large intestines, were found of a bright red colour. This appearance was most marked at the caecum and sigmoid flexure of the colon. The local action of the poison on the mouth and throat was in this instance considerable. (' Edinburgh Monthly Journal,' Dec. IHol, p. 5o2.) Perforation of the stomach is rare as an effect of this poison : there is, I believe, only one case on record. Appearances like those just described, have been seen in the alimentary canal, not only where the case has termi- nated fatally in a few hours, but Avhere it has been protracted for six, eight, and even eleven days. (Chaussier, ' Kecueil des Memoires,' p. 363.) In the case of a man, set. 42, who swallowed, by mistake, thirty grains of this poison dissolved, and who died on the twelfth day, the stomach was found empty, the mucous membrane was of a dull, dark red colour, chiefly about the smaller curvature. It was softened, and near the intestinal end was grey, pulpy, and gangrenous. In the gullet, the lining membrane appeared to have been stripped off in shreds. The intestines were in a state of intense inflammation, passing into gangrene. The other viscera presented no particular appeai-ance. In this case the symptoms were manifested in a few minutes : there was a burn- ing pain down the gullet to the stomach, described as if the parts were on fire; there was no mark of corrosion in the mouth ; there was a sensation as if the throat was ' grown up :' and there was blood in the vomited matters as well as in the evacuations. There was no salivation at any period. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' Feb. 26, 1859, p. 210.) Quantity required to destroy Life.—The smallest dose which is reported to have destroyed life is tJu-ee grains. This was in the case of a child, and the quantity was accurately determined fi-oni the fact of its having been made up by mistake for three grains of calomel, which a physician intended to order. (This case is referred to in the ' Lancet,' 1845, p. 297.) It is probable that, under favourable circumstances, from three to five grains, or even less, would destroy an adult. Persons who had taken large doses have been known to recover when remedies were timely administered, or early vomiting Avas pro- duced ('Med. Times and Gaz.,' Feb. 18, 1860, p. 162); and sometimes recovery has been wrongly attributed to the remedy. In May 1862, a man swallowed eighty grains of corrosive sublimate dissolved in whisky and water. In ten minutes violent vomiting occuiTcd. A mixture of albumen and milk was first given, and in about twenty-five minutes, gold-leaf Avith reduced iron made into a bolus. Some Avarm water had been previously administered in order to clear the stomach of any albumen or mucus. Vomiting recurred Avith less violence,—the matters being mixed Avith gold-leaf. On the next day, there was no salivation, but in about eight days the man perfectly recovered. ('Ann. Jour. Med. Sci.,' April 1863, p. 340.) Dr. Johnston attributed the recovery to the gold and iron, but there is not tlie slightest evidence that the metals had exerted any galvanic action in decomposing the corrosive sublimate: on the contrary, the particles of gold-leaf rejected after the administration of the antidote were apparently unchanged. The recovery was, no doubt, due to the early vomiting, and the free use of albumen and milk. Feriod at which Death takes place.—In an acute case, an individual com- monly dies in from one to five days; but death may take place much sooner or later than this. The shortest fatal case on record Avas comnumicated to me by Mr. Welch. The quantity of poison taken Avas not ascertained, but the man died in less than half an hour. ('On Poisons, Corhosive Suhlimate.') In a case reported in the 'Edinburgh Monthly Journal,' vol. 1, 1860, p. 958, an adult Avho took from sixty to eighty grains of corrosive sublimate, did not die until the twelfth day. The case Avas somewhat peculiar. On the first day there Avas no complaint of pain in the gullet or stomach ; the throat Avas pahiful on the second day, and the mouth and gums Avere affected on the


[290/1290 b21964944_0290.jp2]

CORROSIVE SUBLIMATE. ANALYSIS. 226 third day. On the eighth day tlie man had apparently recovered, but he gradually became -weaker, and died on the twelfth day. The subjoined cases, which are of recent occurrence, show the general effects of the poison in causing death rapidly or sloAvly. The first of these, Avhich occurred in September, 18G1, is reported by Dr. Skegg. ' Lancet,' Feb. 1, 1862.) In this case a large dose of corrosive sublimate (112 grains) caused death in three hours and a quarter. In the second, which occurred at Guy's Hospital in November 1861, about five grains of corrosive sublimate caused death in six days : in both cases the poison was taken dissolved. In Dr. Skegg's case, a man, a;t. 54, swallowed two pennyworth of the poison (a quarter of an ounce) at 11 a.m. When seen by Dr. Skegg soon afterwards, he was on the bed in a state of great prostration : his skin was blanched, and covered with a cold clammy perspiration ; he vomited a thick stringy albuminous-looking substance. There was intense pain over the abdomen, and great ptuging with discharge of blood : the pulse was scarcely perceptible, the membrane of the tongue and of the interior of the mouth Avas perfectly Avhite from the local action of the poison. White of egg Avas given freely, and a mustard poultice applied to the abdomen. At one o'clock he Avas more depressed. At a quarter past two. Dr. Skegg again saAV him, and found he had just expired. An inspection was made twenty-four hours after death. The external coat of the stomach Avas of a deep red colour. The mucous membrane internally had the appearance of a piece of dark crimson velvet, oAving to the large quantity of blood extravasated. The in- testines here and there were reddened. The great omentum for about an inch from the stomach Avas of a deep crimson hue. The other organs were healthy. In the second case, in Avhich only five grains of the poison, dissolved in vinegar, were swallowed by a man, jet. 25, the folloAving symptoms Avere observed on his admission into Guy's Hospital. Innnediately after SAvallowing it, he felt a burning heat in his tliroat, and vomited freely. In tAvo hours, there was great pain in the abdomen, he passed blood in his evacuations, and brought up a thick yellow frothy matter, tinged Avith blood. There Avas suppression of urine. He died on the sixth day. On inspection, the gullet presented marks of the local action of the poison. The mucous membrane of the stomach Avas reddened, and throughout minutely injected. There was no appearance of chemical corrosion. The small intestines at their loAver part, as Avell as the large intestines, Avere deeply injected. The csecum was but slightly affected. Seven ounces of the liver, and one half of the stomach, gave only minute traces of mercuiy. The greater part of the poison had been discharged by vomiting or by elimination during the six days which the patient survived. Chemkal Analysis.—Corrosive sublimate is usually seen in heavy crystals, or in the form of a crystalline Avhite powder as a solid. 1. When the powder is he^ated on platinum foil or mica, it melts, and is volatilized in a Avhite vapour Avithout leaving any residue. 2. When heated in a close tube, it melts and forms a sublimate, consisting of prismatic crystals sometimes stel- lited. 3. The poAvder is changed in colour by the following reagents: iodide of potassium produces a bright scarlet, potash a yelloAV, and sulphide of ammonium a black precipitate; ammonia does not alter its colour. 4. The SfsuSi^a^ftS^ "'^'^"'^ ^^^?"''^ "'^y discovered by one process. Mix the poAvder Avith four parts of corrosiv diameters.


[291/1290 b21964944_0291.jp2]

TESTS FOR THE SOLUTION. 227 dried carbonate of soda (obtained by incinerating the bicarbonate), until the residue in the reduction tube fuses and becomes white. A sublimate of me- tallic mercury in distinct and well-defined globules will be obtained. Detach by a file, the end of the tube containing the fused residue, which is chloi-ide of sodium with some undecomposed carbonate. Digest it in water with nitric acid, and apply heat uutil it is entirely dissolved: then add to the solution nitrate of silver. A white precipitate of chloride of silver, insoluble in nitric acid, will be at once produced. The solid is thus proved to contain both mer- cury and chlorine, and the only compound of these elements soluble in water, Pnsmatic crystals of corrosive sublimate 1. Mercury sublimed in globules, from cor- from solution in water, magnified rosive sublimate, in a reduction-tube, thirty diameters. „ .„ , 2. The same, magnified. is corrosive sublimate. In solution in Avater. A few drops of the solution of corrosive sublimate evaporated in a glass slide yield slender opaque silky prisms. When a weak solution of iodide of potassium is dropped on them, they acquire a bright scarlet colour, and chloride of potassium is formed. These characters, which may be obtained from the minutest crystal and only one drop of solution, prove that the body dissolved in water is corrosive sublimate: it is thus distinguished from every other mineral poison, and all other substances whatever. 1. Protochloride of tin added to a solution of coiTosive sublimate, produces a black precipitate which, after it has been boiled, is resolved into globules of metallic mercury. 2. Sulphuretted hydrogen and sulphide of ammonium produce, after a time, a black sulphide, not soluble in alkalies or diluted acids. 3. If the liquid is acidulated, and bright copper foil, wire, or gauze, is plunged into it, the copper will acquire a silvery-white deposit, even in the cold, but more rapidly by heat. When the copper with the metallic deposit is heated in a tube, globules of mercury are obtained. In Organic Liquids.—The liquid should be separated by filtra- tion from any insoluble portions. The latter should be pressed, dried, and set aside for a separate analysis. A slip of bright copper-foil or gauze may be employed as a trial test in the manner above described. In place of copper, a small galvanic combination, made by twisting a layer of gold-foil round a layer of zinc-foil, may be introduced. The liquid should be slightly acidulated with hydrochloric acid and wanned. The metals should be suspended in the liquid for some hours. If the mer- curial poison is present, even in small quantity, the gold will sooner or later lose its colour and become silvered, while the zinc a layer of gold-foil will be wholly or in part dissolved. The slip of gold-foil may be roimd zinc-foii. washed in water, and afterwards in ether and dried. It should be divided into Q 2


[292/1290 b21964944_0292.jp2]

228 DETECTION OF ABSORBED MERCURY. two equal portions. One sliould be submitted to heat in a tube, when globules of mercury will be obtained; the other should be heated in a few drops of concentrated nitric acid, until the gold has reacquired its yellow colour. On evaporating the excess of acid, and adding a solution of protochloride of tin, a dark gi-ey precipitate of metallic mercury is thrown down. It may be remarked that sublimed mercury is wholly unlike any other volatile substance. The perfect sphericity of the globules, their silvery whiteness by reflected, and complete opacity by transmitted light, at once identify them as metallic mer- cury. The sublimate of metallic mercury differs from that of arsenic in the fact that when heated, it sublimes simply as metal without change. It is not oxidized (like metallic arsenic), by heating it in a reduction-tube, but is simply transferred with its metallic lustre from one part of the tube to another. The mercurial sublimate is soluble in nitro-hydrochloric acid, yielding on evaporation prismatic crystals of corrosive sublimate. The yellow colour of the gold may not have been concealed by the mer- curial deposit, owing perhaps to its great tenuity. Hence it is always proper to heat the gold in a reduction tube before coming to the conclusion that mercury is absent. The tube itself may not show a sublimate to the naked eye, owing to the minuteness of the globules, and their being much scattered. In all cases the tube should be examined, at first with a low, and sub- sequently with a high poAver of the microscope. ]\Iinute strings of globules, varying from the 1-8000th to the 1-16000th of an inch in diameter, may thus be detected. They are frequently deposited in a kind of chain in any minute crack or line on the interior of the glass tube. In the event of a doubt existing respecting the mercurial nature of the sublimate, the following experiment Avill remove it. Cut off by a file the portion of glass in which they are deposited : introduce this into a wide short tube, with a few drops of hydrochloric and half the quantity of nitric acid. Heat the acid liquid, and carry it to dryness on a sand-bath. White prismatic crystals of corrosive sublimate Avill remain, if the sublimate was of a mer- curial nature, and too great a heat has not been applied. On touching the Avhite residue cautiously with a drop of solution of iodide of potassium, the crystals will acquire a scarlet-red colour. Another method of analysis may be sometimes usefully resorted to. Place the suspected organic liquid in a small golden capsule. Acidulate it slightly with hydrochloric acid, and touch the gold, through the acid liquid, with a slip of pure zinc foil. Mercury will be deposited in a white silvery stain on the gold, wherever the two metals have come into contact. Wash out the capsule with distilled water, and add a few drops of strong nitric acid. Per- uitrate of mercury is thus obtained, Avhich may be tested by the processes above described for the detection of the persalts of mercury. Any solid pre- cipitates, or insoluble compounds, of mercury, may be dissolved by strong nitric acid, and the sohition tested for the metal. If none is found, the dried solid, mixed with dried carbonate of soda, may be heated in a tube, when mercury, if present, will be volatilized. Absorbed Mercury.—Although absorbed mercury, like other metals is eliminated from the system, yet its elimination through the ordinary secre- tions appears to be slow, and subject to some uncertainty with respect to the time at which it occurs, as well as to the duration of the process. That it is rapidly absorbed and deposited in the tissues of the organs, is undoubted • but when once deposited, the period for its entire elimination can scarcely be predicted. Mercury in a man or animal, labouring under its immediate effects, cannot be so readily detected in the urine as arsenic. Mr. Tuson, of the_ Royal Veterinary College, informs me that he gave to a mare, at first four grams, and afterwards five grains of corrosive sublimate twice a day. At the


[293/1290 b21964944_0293.jp2]

PROCESSES FOR MERCURY IX THE TISSUES. 229 end of fourteen days, lie tested a pint of the urine for mercury, but found none. After the lapse of three weeks, it was easily discovered in this Huid. The animal then left the infirmary. In a case of chronic poisoning by mer- cury, to be presently mentioned (see page 234), mercury could not be detected in twelve ounces of urine which were voided Avhile the patient Avas labouring under the effects of the absorbed poison, although several weeks had elapsed, and mercury Avas detected in the tissues after death. In the search for mer- cury in living persons labouring under this poison, a large quantity of urine should be examined, and an analysis made at interAals. The urine may be evaporated to dryness, and the dry residue or extract treated by the following process, Avhich is the sjune as that required ibr the tissues. From four to eight ounces of the liver or other organs should be dried, broken up, and then boiled until dissolved, in one part of pure hydrochloric acid and four parts of Avater. The acid liquid may be strained through linen, and the residue ])ressed. The liquid, if in large quantity, should now be concentrated by gentle evaporation, and Avhile still slightly Avarm, a piece of copper-gauze (proved to be free from mercury) should be in- troduced, at the end of a fine platinum Avirc, into the acid liquid. The copper may acquire . „ ,,. •! • n • small sublimate of mercury, mag- a Avhite, grey, or silvery tarnish in a iew minutes nified V2i diameters, or not until after tAventy-four hours. It may be removed, Avashed in water and alcohol, and dried and examined by a Ioav power of the microscope. The deposition of any Avhite metal on the copper Avill then be perceptible. It may be rolled into a pellet and heated in a dry reduction-tube, Avhen minute globules may appear as a sublimate. The sub- limate in the tube should be examined Avith a microscope, and the copper should in all cases be heated, Avhether the red colour of this metal appears to be covered or not by any deposit. The efficiency of this method of detecting mercury when absorbed and deposited in the tissues, is indicated by the following fact. In an Jllleged case of poisoning (May 18G4) a child died after an illness of tAventy-two hours. Fourteen hours before death, two grains of calomel had been given to it. Thi^i had caused much purging, and mercury Avas Ibund in one of the last evacua- tions passed. Four ounces of the liver were treated Avith hydi-ochloric acid and Avater, and a small piece of pure copper placed in the acid liquid Avhile Avarin, and kept there for about forty-eight houi-s. It ac(iuired a slight silvery lustre, and globules of mercury were obtained from it by sublimation. If arsenic should be present in the tissues at the same time, and the acid mixture is boiled, arsenic and mercury Avill be deposited together: and when the copper is heated, the globules of mercuiy Avill be obtained nucleated or inter- mixed Avith octahedral crystals of arsenious acid. In a case of exhumation after twenty-one months' burial, these mixed sublimates Avere obtained by the examination of the rectum of the deceased. {Reg. V. Bacon, Lincoln Summer Assizes, 1857.) It appeared in evidence that arsenic had been administered to the woman a day or two before death, and a dose of calomel had been prescribed more recently. This accounted for the presence of the mixed sublimates. Mixed sublimate of iiiercury iirid arsenious acid magnified.


[294/1290 b21964944_0294.jp2]

230 PROCESSES FOE MERCURY. CALOMEL. Arsenic is not readily deposited on copper in the cold, while mercury is readily deposited at all temperatures from acid liquids. We may sometimes take advantage of this difference in chemical properties, to obtain a separate deposit of this metal. ' The processes above described reveal only the presence of mercury. When the quantity of corrosive sublimate dissolved in an organic liquid is moderately' large, it may be removed by means of ether. Place the filtered liquid supposed to contjiin the poison, in a stoppered tube : add to it, twice its volume of pure ether, and agitate the liquid at intervals for half an hour. Allow the liquid to subside, pour off the ether into a dial-glass, and submit it to spontaneous evapo- ration. As the ether passes off, the corrosive sublimate will be deposited in white silky-looking prisms. These may be purified by solution in water if necessary, and the solution again crystallized. Corrosive sublimate may thus be separated from arsenic and other mineral poisons in solution. If mercury and arsenic are associated in a poisonous mixture, or in the tissues, the arsenic may be entirely separated by distillation (page 208). Masses of corrosive subli- mate may be sometimes locked up in thick viscid mucus; and in such cases, the coarse powder being heavy, it may be separated by simply agitating the viscid liquid in water, and then decanting the upper portion suddenly. This poison is decomposed and precipitated by many organic principles, such as albumen, fibrin, mucous membrane,—also by gluten, tannic acid, and other vegetable substances. Thus, then, we cannot always expect to find it in the stomach, in a state of solution. Mercury is not a constituent of the body. The discovery of it in the tissues, therefore, proves that it must have been received ab extra. By one or other of these processes, Ave may be able to show the presence of mercury, but not of corrosive sublimate, in the body. Whether the mercurial compound had acted as a poison or not, must be determined from symptoms and appearances: whether it had been given or taken as a medicine or not, is a conclusion which must also be determined from other circumstances. The proof that the mercury was really in the form of corrosive sublimate, could only be derived from the discovery of some undissolved portions of the solid poison in the stomach or its contents, or from a separation of the poison itself by means of ether. If thus obtained after filtration of an organic liquid, it would show its presence in the form of a soluble salt: all the soluble salts are poisonous, and are rarely used intemally as medicines. If undissolved, the absorbed mercury may have been derived from some mercurial medicine in- nocently taken by the deceased. Nothing is more common than to discover traces of mercury in the stomach, bowels, liver, kidneys, or other organs of a dead body. No importance can be attached to this discovery in the absence of evidence that the deceased has actually suffered from symptoms of mercurial poisoning. As to the mercury found in the tissues, it may have been derived from a soluble or insoluble compound, or from exposure to the vapours of the metal, or of its salts, in various trades. A person may die from the effects of corrosive sublimate, and no mercury may be found in the tissues. A case of this kind occurred to me some years since at Guy's Hospital; and another, in which deceased died in fifteen days from a large dose of corrosive sublimate in whisky, has been reported by Dr. Geoghegan. On this occasion, although the local effects of the poison on the throat, stomach, and bowels, were of an intense kind, the viscera on careful analysis, yielded no trace of mercury : the metal had been entirely eliminated in fifteen days. (' Med. Gaz.' vol. 46, p. 253.) Calomel. Snhchloride of Mermry. This substance, although commonly regarded as a mild medicine, is capable of destroying life, in small doses, by


[295/1290 b21964944_0295.jp2]

WHITE PRECIPITATE. RED PRECIPITxVTE. 231 causing excessive salivation with ulceration and gangrene, and in large do.ses by acting as an irritant poison. Auali/sis.—It is known from corrosive sublimate by its insolubility in water, alcohol, and ether. It is known from white precipitate by its insolubility in acids, and by its being blackened by alkalies. A mercurial sublimate may be obtained from it by heating it with dry or anhydrous carbonate of soda. White Precipitate. Ammom'ated Mercury.—A few years since it was a contested question whether white precipitate was or was not a poison: and at the Chelmsford Lent Assizes in 1850, a woman who was indicted for administering this substance to her husband, owed her acquittal to the lenient assumption in her favour that it was not a poison. Out of fourteen cases which I have collected, in which white precipitate was taken in doses varying from a few grains to forty,—two only proved fatal; and one of these was the subject of a trial for murder {Reg. v. Moore, Lewes Lent Assizes, 1860). The symptoms which it produces are violent vomiting, cramps, purging and pain in the stomach with convulsions. After death there is more or less inflamma- tion of the stomach and bowels. In August 1863 a woman, aet. 30, swallowed a pennyworth of Avhite precipitate and shortly afterwards a pennywoi'th of acetate of lead. In half-au-hour, there was violent vomiting and pain over the whole of the abdomen. An hour and a-half afterwards the symptoms were, in addition to the abdominal pain, great thirst and a comatose condition. On the second day, there was slight tenderness of the gums, a flow of saliva, flushed face, with great tenderness of the abdomen; and on the fourth day profuse salivation. This subsided on the tenth day, and the woman recovered. Med. Times and Gazette,' 1863, 2, 615.) Dr. Pavy's experiments on dogs and rabbits show that this is a more formidable poison than it has been hitherto supposed to be. The greater number of recoveries were probably owing to the substance being early ejected by vomiting. Rabbits, Avhich do not vomit, were killed by a dose of four and five grains in a few hours. After death, mercury was found deposited in various organs, but more in the kidneys than in the other viscera. (For additional flicts connected with the action of this poison, see 'Guy's Hosp. Reports,' October, 1860, p. 483.) Analysis.—White precipitate is an insoluble chalky-looking compound con- taining about eighty per cent, of mercury. As it is sold in the shops, it frequently contains corrosive sublimate to the amount of one or two per cent. It is not used internally, but it is much employed by the poorer classes in the treatment of ringworm. It is soluble in acids, is not blackened by alkalies, and it yields a mercurial sublimate when heated with carbonate of soda. If boiled in a solution of potash, it evolves anmionia, and yellow oxide of mercury is precipitated. It may be detected in oi-ganic fluids and solids by boiling them in one part of hydrochloric acid and four parts of water. The mercury may then be separated by means of copper (p. 229). Red Precipitate. Bed Oxide of Mercuri/.—This substance is poisonous, but instances of poisoning by it are very rare. The following case occurred at Guy's Hospital in 1833. A woman, set. 22, who had swallowed a quantity of red precipitate, was brought in labouring under the following symptoms : the surface was cold and clammy, there was stupor approaching to narcotism, frothy discharge from the mouth, and occasional vomiting : the vomited matters contained some red powder, which was proved to be red precipitate. There was considerable pain in the abdomen, increased by pressure ; and there were cramps in the lower extremities. On the following day, the throat and mouth became painful, and the woman complained of a coppery taste. The treatment consisted in the use of the stomach-pump, and the free administration of albumen with gluten. She left the hospital four days afterwards, still under the influence of mercury. The quantity of oxide here taken, was not ascertained.


[296/1290 b21964944_0296.jp2]

VERMILION. CYANIDE OF MERCURY. 232 Anah/sis.—Its red colour identifies it. When heated in a close tube, it is resolved into oxygen and mercury which is deposited in globules. Cinnabar. Vermilion. Persulpliide of Mercury.—The term Cinnahar is applied to a dark and heavy compound of sulphur and mercury, while Vermilion is the same substance reduced to a fine powder. It is well known as a red pigment, and is ofl;en employed in colouring confectionery and wafers. It is stat ed to have proved fatal to animals in the proportion of from thirty to seventy grains, when applied externally to a wound. Cinnabar is sometimes used for giving a red colour to ointments, e.g. the sulphur ointment; and it is also improperly employed by some dentists as a colouring matter to vulcanized rubber for mounting artificial teeth. Although this insoluble com- pound of mercury cannot be regarded as an active irritant poison in the stomach, the placing of it in such a situation that it should be always in con- tact with the mucous fluids of the mouth, is liable to lead to the usual conse- quences of chronic poisoning by merciu-y. In May 1864, a medical man consulted me under the following circumstances. Upon the recommendation of a dentist, he had worn this red composition as a frame for false teeth, in place of gold. After some time he perceived a metallic taste in his mouth, the gums became inflamed and ulcerated, there was great weakness and want of nervous power, with pains in the loins and an eruption on the legs. When the composition was removed, these symptoms abated. I examined the sub- stance, and found in it a great quantity of vermilion : it had been mixed with the sulphur and rubber to give the appearance of the red colour of the gums. Dr. Wells, of Reading, has directed the attention of professional men to acci- dents of this nature. A patient of his, who had been provided with a fi'ame of this description for the upper and lower jaws, perceived, soon after wearing it, a metallic taste in his mouth. His health failed, he lost his appetite and became emaciated : he suffered from flatulency, fcetid breath and looseness of the bowels: his pulse was 100 and weak, and his tongue coated with a Avhitefilm. This gentleman was peculiarly sensitive to the action of mercury. He left off wearing the teeth, and he became gradually better and stronger. (' British Med. Journal,' Sept. 5, 18G3, p. 3GG.) Dr. Sutro has published a short abstract of a case in which the vapour of vermilion applied externally, produced severe symptoms. A woman, by the advice of a quack, applied this vapour to a cancerous breast. She employed three drachms of vermilion, and covered herself with a sheet, so that the vapour should only reach the body externally. After three fumigations, she suffered from severe salivation and violent fever, Avhich continued for four weeks. The right arm became oedematous. (' Med. Times,' Sept. 27, 1845, p. 17.) Analysis.—Vermilion, or the organic compound containing it, may be entirely decomposed by nitro-hydrochloric acid. The residue evaporated to dryness contains corrosive sublimate. This may be taken vip by water and the usual tests applied (p. 227). Ether will separate corrosive sublimate fi-om the aqueous solution. The vermilion contained in vulcanite, was thus readily analysed. The red sulphide of mercury is not blackened like red lead by sulphide of ammonium, and is not dissolved by hydrochloric acid like red oxide of mercury. It yields an alkaline sulphide and globules of metallic mercury, when heated with powdered ferrocyanide of potassium. Cyanide of Mercury.—This is a substance which is but little known, except to chemists, yet it is an active poison, and has caused death in at least two instances. In April, 1823, a person who had swallowed twenty grains of this compound (tliirteen decigrammes), Avas immediately seized with all the symptoms of poisoning by corrosive sublimate, and died in nine days. There


[297/1290 b21964944_0297.jp2]

TURPETII MINERAL. NITRATES OF MERCURY. 233 ^vas continiied vomiting, with excessive salivation, iilceration of the mouth and tln-oat, suppression of urine, purging, and, lastly, convulsions of the extremities. On inspection, the mucous membrane of the stomach and intestinal canal was extensively inflamed. (' Orfila,' vol. 1, p. 735.) Dr. Cliristison quotes a case in which ten grains destroyed life within the same jwriod of time. (Op. cit. p. 427.) As a poison, the cyanide is not much inferior in activity to corrosive sublimate, but it has no corrosive pi-operties. TuRPETH Mineral. Suhsulphate of Mercury.—Fatal cases of poisoning by this compound are by no means common. Although insoluble in water, it is undoubtedly an irritant poison, and is capable of causing death in a comparatively small dose. A well-marked instance of its fatal operation was communicated to the Pathological Society by Mr. Ward, in March, 1847. A boy, set. IG, swallowed one drachm of this preparation on the night of February 19th. It produced a burning sensation in the mouth and throat, and vomiting in ten minutes. In about an hour there was paleness, with anxiety of countenance, coldness of surface, constant sickness, sense of heat and constriction in the throat, and burning pain in the stomach, with cramps. The irritability of the stomach continued in spite of treatment, and after two days there was salivation with mercurial fojtor. The gums acquired a deep bluish tint, and began to ulcerate. The patient died in about a week after taking the poison, without convulsions, and without suffering at any period from symptoms of cerebral disturbance. The principal appearances in the body were inflammation of the gullet, its nuicous membrane at the lower pirt peeling off; the inner surface of the stomach near the two openings (cardia and pylorus) was covered with petechial spots; the small intestines were contracted, the inner coat reddened, and petechial spots were found, but chiefly in the large intestines. The parotid and submaxillary glands were swollen. Mercury was detected in the intestines, (See ' Med. Gaz.' vol.39, p. 474.) Mr. Snoad, of Yoxall, has communicated to me the particulars of another case which was the sui)ject of a trial for manslaughter at the Staf- ford Lent Assizes 1862. A young man, a3t. 27, by the mistake of a druggist, was .supplied with turpeth mineral in place of TEthiop's mineral. He swallowed about two scruples of it, on an empty stomach, with a like quantity of cream of tartar and treacle. In ten minutes he was seized with violent vomiting and purging, the pulse was slow and small, the skin cold and clammy, and there Avas pain in the abdomen, especially in the region of the stomach. Under treatment the symptoms of irritation abated, but never entirely sub.sided, and he died quietly on the eleventh day after taking the poisonous mixture. On inspection the principal appearances were softening of the mucous membrane of the stomach and intestines, with patches of in- flammation and dark discolouration. A small portion of the liver yielded mercury when treated with copper and hydrochloric acid. Nitrates of Mercury.—These are corrosive poisons whicli are used for various purposes in the arts. They are solid white salts, easily dissolved by cold water when there is a little excess of acid present. The acid pernitrate caused death in a case reported by Mr. Bigsley in the ' Medical Gazette,' vol. G, p. 329. A butcher's boy dissolved some mercury in strong nitric acid, and swallowed about a teaspoonful of the solution. Soon afterwards he suffered excruciating pain in the throat, gullet, and stomach:—there was great anxiety, Avith cold skin, small pulse, colic, and purging. He became gradually Avcaker, and died in about two hours and a half. On inspection, the throat, gullet, and stomach were found corroded and inflamed. Although lie survived so short a time, the mucous membrane of tlie stomach was of a


[298/1290 b21964944_0298.jp2]

234 CHRONIC poisoning by nitrate op mercury. deep red colour. I have elsewhere related a case in which the application of the pernitrate of mercury to the throat as an escharotic, caused immediate death by asphyxia. (' Guy's Hospital Reports,' Oct. 1850, p. 206.) The acid nitrate of mercury has often been employed by accoucheurs as a local application in diseases of the neck of the uterus. In one instance in which it was thus used, the ordinary symptoms of mercurial poisoning showed them- selves, and the patient appears to have suffered severely. (' Medical Gazette,' vol. 45, p. 1025.) At the Leicester Summer Assizes, 1857, a girl was charged with administer- ing nitrate of mercury to her mistress {Reg. v. E. Smith). The evidence showed that the accused had put the poison into some camomile tea prescribed for the prosecutrix. Only a small quantity was taken, as the tea had a nauseous taste. The symptoms were :—a burning sensation in the throat and stomach, violent vomiting, with severe pain in the abdomen. The woman recovered. A man, aet. 32, suffering from chronic poisoning by the ni- trate of mercury, was admitted into Guy's Hospital on the 10th December 1863. He had been for four years engaged in packing the fur of rabbits, rats, and other animals, the dried skins of which had been previously brushed over with a solution of nitrate of mercury. For the first three years, he suffered only from a feeling of general weakness. About a twelvemonth since, he could not hold his hand steadily enough to shave himself, and he soon after- wards lost completely the control over the voluntary movements of his limbs. Three or four months before his admission, he had slight twitchings of his muscles when in bed. He was not at all emaciated. He said he had been salivated for about three months, soon after he began his occupaj^ion of packing furs; but his gums were not tender, and he had no metallic taste in his mouth. A month before his admission he gave up his work. When he became a patient under Dr. Rees, I saw him, and his case was watched by Mr. Spurgin, one of my pupils. He could walk with assistance, but on stand- ing or lying down he could not control his limbs, which trembled consider- ably. There were continued involuntary movements of his body and limbs, like those of chorea. He became much exhausted, owing to want of sleep ; he perspired profusely. The urine was high-coloured, but otherwise natural. Twelve ounces of it did not yield any mercury. No treatment appeared to give him rest or relief. Chloroform arrested the spasmodic movements, but only while he was under its influence. In five days he passed his urine involuntarily. He became more quiet and slept a little at night. He had difficulty in swallowing; became gradually weaker and died, apparently from exhaustion, on the 24th December, a fortnight after his admission. On inspection, the body was well nourished; the muscles were firm and healthy. The brain and spinal cord were carefully examined by Dr. Wilks, and found to be quite healthy. The Imigs, heart, liver, spleen and kidneys, were free from any morbid appearance, or any change to indicate a cause of death. I made a chemical analysis of the brain, liver, and kidney. Six ounces of each organ were dried, and one-half of the dried residue, treated with hydrochloric acid and water, as elsewhere described (page 229) gave, in 48 hours, on a small portion of copper gauze, a greyish white deposit, which yielded globules of metallic mercury by heat. The kidney yielded the largest sublimate ; but the quantity obtained from each organ was small, and might be described as in microscopical traces. The globules from the brain and liver had an avera"-e size of l-2600th of an inch ; those from the kidney were larger. Dr. Whitley procured a portion of the fur similar to that which the man had been eno-ao-ed in packing, and in a small quantity of this, a soluble salt of mercury was readily detected. The case which at first presented some difficulty in account- ing for death, thus resolved itself into one of exhaustion as a result of


[299/1290 b21964944_0299.jp2]

POISONING BY SUGAR OF LEAD. SYMPTOMS. 235 chronic poisoning by mercury under somewhat unusual circumstances. It is probable that the man received the dust of the dried nitrate through the air which he breathed, as well as by contact with his mouth, nostrils, and skin. As other workpeople similarly engaged were not found to have suffered, this may have been a case of mercurial poisoning by idiosyncrasy. Analysis.—When heated with dry or anhydrous carbonate of soda in a tube, the dry nitrate yields a sublimate of mercury. If heated alone, it is resolved into red oxide. CHAPTER 20. ON POISONING BY LEAD—SUGAR OF LEAD SYMPTOMS APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH CHEMICAL ANALYSIS LEAD IN ORGANIC MIXTURES CARBONATE OR WHITE LEAD—CHRONIC POISONING—POISONING BY COPPER—BLUE VITRIOL. SYMPTOMS. APPEARANCES AFTER DEATH. POISONING BY OTHER COMPOUNDS OF COPPER—■ CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. COPPER IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS IN ARTICLES OF FOOD. Sugar of Lead. Acetate of Lead.—This is more frequently taken as a poison than any of the other salts, although cases of acute poisoning by lead in any form are not common. The substance is commonly met with in solid heavy crystalline masses, white, or of a brownish-white colour ; it resembles loaf- sugar in appearance, and has often been mistaken for it. It has also a sweet taste, which is succeeded by an astringent or metallic taste. It is very soluble in water. Four parts of distilled water at 60° will dissolve one part; it is much more soluble at a boiling temperature. Symptoms.—Acetate or sugar of lead is by no means an active poison, although it is popularly considered to possess a virulent action. In medical practice it has often been given in considerable doses without any serious effects resulting. Dr. Christison states that he has given it in divided doses to the amount of eighteen grains daily for eight or ten days without remarking any unpleasant symptom, except once or twice slight colic. When, however, the quantity taken has been from one to two ounces, the folloAving symptoms have been observed : a burning pricking sensation in the throat, with dry- ness and thirst, vomiting and uneasiness at the pit of the stomach, some- times followed by severe colic. The abdomen is tense, and the parietes have been occasionally drawn in. The pain is relieved by pressure, and has intermissions. There is generally constipation of the bowels. If any faices are passed, they are commonly of a dark colour, indicative of the con- version of a portion of the lead into sulphide. The skin is cold, and there is great prostration of strength. When the case is protracted, the patient has been observed to suffer from cramp in the calves of the legs, pain in the insides of the thighs, numbness, and sometimes paralysis of the extremities. The affection of the nervous system is otherwise indicated by giddiness, torpor, and even coma. A well-marked blue line has been noticed round the margin of the gums, where they join the teeth. A remarkable series of cases of poisoning by acetate of lead has been re- ported by Mr. Bancks, of Stourbridge. (' Lancet,' May 5, 1849, p. 478.) By some accident, about thirty pounds of this substance were mixed at a miller's with eighty sacks of flour, and the whole was made into bread by the bakers and supplied as usual to their customers. It seems that no fewer than five hundred persons were attacked with symptoms of poisoning afler partaking of this bread. In a few days they complained of a sense of constriction in the throat and the pit of the stomach, violent crampy pains round the navpl, rigidity of the abdominal muscles, a dragging pain in the loins, and cramp


[300/1290 b21964944_0300.jp2]

236 POISOXING BY SUGAR OF LEAD. APPEARANCES. v/ith paralysis of tlie lower extremities. There was obstinate constipation, and the urine was scanty and of a deep red colour. The pulse generally was slow and feeble; the countenance anxious and sunken, frequently of a peculiar livid hue; tongue flabby ; ,gums marked by a deep blue line. The surface •was cool, and there was a general arrest of the secretions. Sickness was not a uniform symj)tom, and even when it existed at first, it speedily subsided. The mental faculties were undisturbed. Not one of the cases proved fatal, but among the more aggravated, there was great prostration, with collapse, livid coimtenance, universal cramps, numbness, and other alarming symptoms. After apparent convalescence, some of the symptoms returned in a more aggravated form Avithout any obvious cause, and for a long time the patients were out of health. Inflammation was not observed. Purgative medicines Avere found most effectual in the treatment. The quantity of acetate of lead taken by each person could not be determined, as, on analysis, the samj^les of bread were found to be unequally impregnated Avith the poison. Even when the patient recovers from the first symptoms, the secondary effects often last for a considerable time. Mr. Gorringe has recorded the cases of two girls, each of Avhom swalloAved an ounce of the acetate of lead by mistake. Soon afterwards they felt a burning pain in the mouth, throat, and stomach, and in a quarter of an hour they A'omited freely : in half an hour, there Avas severe pain in the bowels, Avith purging. Under treatment recovery took place. ('Prov. Med. Journ.' April, J846.) After the lapse of a year, they both suffered from severe pain in the pit of the stomach, Avhich Avas tender on pressure. Nothing could be retained on the stomach; and there was a choking sensation in the throat, Avith other constitutional symptoms. Paralysis and other symptoms of nervous disorder are, liOAveA'er, by no means necessary consequences. A girl Avho had SAvallowed sixty grains of acetate of lead, and had suffered severely from the primary symptoms, recovered in about three weeks without any paralysis or other disorder affecting the muscular system. ('Lancet,' April 4, 184G, p. 384.) This lead-palsy appears to be a more common consequence of chronic poisoning; i. e. of small doses taken at intervals. Appearances.—In one acute case related by Dr. KerchhofFs, the mucous membrane of the stomach Avas found removed in several places, especially near the intestinal opening; and most of the intestines Avere in a state of high inflammation. A trial for murder by this substance took place at the Central Criminal Court, in November 1843 {Reg. v. Edwards). The stomach and intestines are stated to have been found inflamed, and there Avere dark spots on the former. In animals, according to Dr. Mitscherlich, when the dose is large, the mucous coat of the stomach is attacked and corroded; this change appears to be purely chemical, and takes place in all parts of the body Avith Avhich the salt of lead comes in contact. If given in a small dose, it is decomposed by the gastric secretions, and exerts no corrosive poAver on the juucous membrane. When the acetate of lead Avas given in a state of albumi- nate dissolved in acetic acid, death took ])lace Avith great rapidity; but on inspection, the stomach Avas not found corroded. This corrosive action belongs to the neutral salt, and is not manifested when the dose is small, or Avhen the poison is combined Avith an acid. Qnantittj required to destroy Life.—Nothing is actually knoAvn concerninir fatal dose of sugar of lead. The facts already detailed shoAv that it may be taken in comparatively large quantity Avithout producing serious effects. Thirty or forty grains have been given daily, in divided doses, Avithout injury. The folloAving additional cases, in some of Avhich recovery took ]-)lace tinder disadvantageous circumstances, prove that the acetate of lead is far from beino- a virtilent poison. Dr. Iliff met with an instance in which an ounce Avas


[301/1290 b21964944_0301.jp2]

CHEMICAL ANALYSIS OF THE SALTS OF LEAD. 237 swallowed in solution : the symptoms were pain in the abdomen resembling colic, vomiting, rigidity, and numbness. It was three hours before any remedies were used, and five hours before the stomach-pump was employed; but the person recovered. In the second case, also, an ounce was sAvallowed : sulphate of magnesia was ireely exhibited, and the stomach-pump was used. On the following morning there was slight excoriation of the gums, which Avere white, with a sensation of heat in the throat: the bowels were relaxed, probably from the effect of the medicine. The day following, there were pains in the legs and thighs, with restlessness and thirst. In a week the woman perfectly recovered. In a case which occurred to Dr. Alderson, a man swallowed an ounce of the acetate of lead in a drunken fit. There was violent vomiting, and the man recovered. Chemical Analysis. Acetate of Lead as a Solid.—1. If a portion of the powder is heated in a small reduction-tube, it melts, then becomes solid : again melts, acquiring a dark colour, and gives off vapours of acetic acid; a black mass is left in the tube, consisting of carbon and reduced metallic lead. No sublimate is formed. If heated on mica, yellow oxide of lead with reduced metal remains. 2. It is very soluble in water, even when cold ; spring water is turned milky by it, from the presence of carbonic acid and sulphates. 3. A small portion of the powder dropped into a saucer containing a solution of iodide of potassium acquires a fine yellow colour. 4. When dropped into caustic potash it remains white. 5. Into sulphuretted hydrogen water or sulphidoof ammonium, it is turned black, in which respect it resembles the white salts of .some other metals. 6. When the powder is boiled in a tube with diluted sulphuric acid, acetic acid, known by its odour and volatility, escapes. AH these properties taken together, prove that the salt is the acetate of lead. Acetate of Lead in Solution.—If acetate of lead is presented in a state of solution, or if the salt is dissolved in water for the purpase of making further examination, we should note the following points. 1. A small quantity, slowly evaporated on a glass slide, will give slender white prismatic crystals, which are turned yellow by iodide of potassium, and black by sulphide of ammonium. The solution is said to be neutral ; but I have found the common acetate of lead to have at the same time both an acid and (with rose paper) an alkaline reaction, i. e. reddening litmus paper, and turning rose-paper green, a circumstance which might create some embarrassment in an analysis. 2. Diluted sidphiiric acid- produces an abundant white precipitate, insoluble in nitric acid, but soluble in hydrochloric acid and in a large ex- cess of potash. 3. It is precipitated of a bright yellow colour by the Iodide of potassium ; the yellow iodide of lead is soluble in potash, forming a colourless solution. It is also dissolved by concentrated hydrochloric acid. 4. Sulphide of ammonium or sulphuretted hydrogen gas, pro- duces a deep black precipitate, even when less than the 100,000th part of the salt is dissolved. 5. Place a few drops of the solution on clean platinum foil, acidulate it with acetic acid, crystals of acetate of lead, magnified then apply through the solution, to the surface 30 diameters, of the platinum, a thin polished slip of zinc :—crystals of metallic lead are instantly deposited on the zinc: by this method, a small quantity of the metal may be detected and collected. Lead in Organic Mixtures—The acetate of lead is precipitated by many organic principles, especially by albumen and tannic acid. Thus, we may have to analyze either an organic liquid containing lead, or a solid prccii)itate


[302/1290 b21964944_0302.jp2]

238 POISONING BY A^-HITE LEAD. consisting of mucus or mucous membrane, intimately united to oxide of lead. The liquid should be filtered and examined by a trial test, i. e. either by adding to a portion, sulphuric acid, or by exposing bibulous paper, dipped into the suspected liquid, to a free current of sulphuretted hydrogen gas. If the paper is not stained brown, there is no perceptible quantity of lead dissolved;—if it is stained brown, we dilute the liquid if necessary, in order to destroy its viscidity, and jjass into it a current of Avashed sulphuretted hydrogen gas until all the chemical action has ceased. 'Yha black sulphuret of lead should be collected on a filter, washed and dried, then boiled for a quarter of an hour in a mixture of one part of nitric acid, diluted with four parts of water. This has the effect of transforming it, at least in part, to nitrate of lead soluble in water. This liquid, when filtered, may be evaporated to drj^ness, and the residue dissolved in Avater, or it may be at once cautiously neutralized by potash (free from lead) or by ammonia, and the tests added. If the quantity is too small for the application of all the tests, we may add sulphuric acid; should a white precipitate be formed, soluble in potash (free from oxide of lead), and this alkaline solution be again turned black by sulphide of ammonium., this is sufficient evidence of the presence of lead. Should there be no lead dissolved, we must decompose the solid and insoluble matters in nitric acid slightly diluted, at a boiling temperature, filter, and test the filtered liquid, previously neutralized ; or we may evaporate to dryness, destroy the organic nifttter by heat and redissolve the residue in nitric acid for testing. Ill the Tissues.—The organic matter, such as a part of the liver or other organ, should be dried and incinerated in a porcelain vessel. The ash should be heated with a small quantity of strong nitric acid, and then evaporated to dryness. The dry residue should be digested in a small quantity of distilled Avater (free from lead), filtered, and after it has been slightly acidulated with nitric acid, a current of Avashed sulphuretted hydrogen gas should be passed into it. The production of a brown colour or a brown precipitate indicates the presence of lead. Lead may thus be detected in the dry residue of urine and of spring or river Avater. Goulard's Extract. Suhacetaie of Lead. Symptoms and Effects.—This substance has caused death in at least four instances,—one in France and three in England. Dr. Aldis describes the case of a Avoman, a;t. 21, who SAvalloAved about three-quarters of a pint of Goulard's extract of lead (strength not stated), having begun Avith small doses. When first seen she Avas in great agony. There Avas severe colicky pain in the abdomen Avhich she rubbed frequently, and the muscles of the belly Avere draAvn iuAvards. The pulse was feeble, there Avas trembling of the hands, and she Avas in constant motion Avith her body from severe suffering. There Avas heat in the throat and abdo- men with intense thirst, and a desire to A^oniit, but there was no vomiting or purging. A dose of sulphate of magnesia produced vomiting and she recovered ; but there remained obstinate constipation of the boAvels. (' Lancet' Jan 14 1860.) ' ■ ' Goulard Water is nothing more than a mixture of one drachm and a half of this solution to a pint of Avater. White Lead. Carbonate of Lead. Symptoms. — A case of poisoning by the carbonate of lead, Avas reported, in October 1844, to the Westminster Medical Society, by Dr. SnoAV. A child aged five years ate a portion not so laro-e as a marble, ground up Avith oil. For three days he merely suflTered from^pain in the abdomen, and costiveness. On the third night, the child became rapidly worse, and there Avas vomiting. He died ninety hours after taking the poison havmg passed some oflTensive motions of a greenish-black colour (probably from admixture with sulphide of lead) before he died. The mucous mem-


[303/1290 b21964944_0303.jp2]

CHRONIC POISONING BY LEAD. PAINTEIl's COLIC. 239 brane of the stomach was much inflamed, and of a dark-red colour through- out. Lead could not be detected in the contents or tissues of the stomach, or in the matter vomited. It is remarkable that in this case so small a quantity- should have proved fatal without exciting any marked symptoms of irritation in the first instance. A young man, set. 20, was recommended to take chalk on account of acidity and heartburn. He took by mistake a piece of cai'bonate of lead, and ate about five or six drachms of it. Atler a few hours he complained of violent burning pains in the stomach, with vomiting. Twenty-fours afterwards, when first seen, he suffered from violent pain, particularly in the pit of the stomach and at the navel. His face was red and swollen, his eyes shining and prominent; his tongue and mouth dry and very z'ed; abdomen distended and extremely sensitive to superficial pressure, whilst stronger pressure alleviated the pain; great thirst; the bowels were constipated. Sulphate of magnesia dissolved in water, with one scruple of tincture of opium, was given to him, and larger doses of the same salt to be repeated with an oily emulsion, by which means the patient soon recovered. (' Casper's Wochenschritl,' No. 36, 1844.) Most of the cases of poisoning by carbonate of lead have been of a chronic character. Chronic Poisoning. Colica pictomwi, or Fainter''s Colic, may be considered 9,5 the chronic form of poisoning by carbonate of lead. It is often difficult to trace the cause, so slowly and insidiously are the effects manifested. In some instances the poison is received through the lungs, or skin, or by the saliva, although no physical or chemical evidence of this mode of introduction can be obtained. In another work (' On Poisons,' 2nd ed., p. 485) I have re- ferred to cases in which colic and paralysis have occurred in persons who had slept in newly painted rooms. Dr. Alderson mentions several instances of this kind. (' Lancet,' Oct. 30, 1852, p. 391.) I have myself suffered from a severe attack of colic as a result of sitting in a room for a few hours a day in which a large surface of canvas for an oil-painting had been covered Avith white lead and drying oil. The late Mr. J. Lizars, of Edinburgh, communi- cated to me the following case. A military officer, set. 50, fond of painting in oil-colours, worked for some time in a room eight feet square which had a large stove in it. He was attacked with wrist-drop (paralysis) in December, 1855, and soon afterwards with paralysis in both legs. It appears that his servant always ground his colours, mixed them, and cleaned his brushes. He had an attack some years before; but from this, by laying aside oil-painting, he completely recovered. In these instances the emanations of lead must have been received through the lungs. Doubtless chemists might be found who would undertake to prove, by ingeniously devised experiments, that there could be no lead in the air of the room ; and coupling their results with the fact that few artists are known to suffer from such symptoms, would contend that lead was not the cause. The symptoms, however, were of the character peculiar to lead-poisoning, and as they disappeared on the removal of the patient to another atmosphere, there could be no doubt about the cause. These insidious effects of lead should be borne in mind by those who deny that any noxious emanations can proceed from arsenical papers in inhabited rooms, merely because the greater number of persons who live in them do not suffer, and because some chemists have affirmed that they could detect no arsenic in a volatile state in the atmosphere of the room. Among white-lead manufacturers the carbonate finds its way into the system either by the skin, the lungs, mouth and nostrils, or all these channels together;—it is diffused in a fine powder through the atmosphere, and thus enters into the lungs. It has been remarked in France, that, in manufactories where the powder was ground diy, not only have the labourers suffered, but horses, dogs, and even rats have died from its efFtcts: the rats have been affected with paralysis in


[304/1290 b21964944_0304.jp2]

240 LEAD PALSY. SYMPTOMS OF POISONING BY LEAD. their hind legs. Since the practice has arisen of gi-inding the carbonate of lead in water° cases of colica pictonum have not been so numerous. Men employed in the manuflicture of pottery or glazed cards are liable to attacks of this" kind. There are numerous other cases in which lead, or its preparations, by mere contact with the skin, have been known to produce the usual results of lead-poisoning. The late Mr. Scanlan communicated to me a case in which an infiuit was paralyzed by reason of its having been, every morninsr, washed with water containing a finely diffused oxide and carbonate of lead. Dr. Todd has described the case of a man in King's College Hospital who suffered from lead-palsy : he had been a potman, and the palsy was attributed to the constant handling of and cleaning of pewter pots. (' Med. Gaz.' vol. 48, p. 1047. For another case, see ' Lancet,' Jan. 21, 18G0, p. GO.) The mere handlino- of lead or its oxides, is therefore sufficient to produce all the effects of chronic poisoning. I have been informed of a case in which a tea-dealer Avas seized with symptoms of lead-poisoning, and the cause remained long unsuspected, until he admitted that, in the course of his trade, he had the idle habit of often placing pieces of tea-lead in his mouth, and crushing the metal between his teeth. One cause of lead-palsy among infants may be the use of farinaceous food wrapped in lead-foil having a thinly tinned surface. I have found such infiints' food to be strongly impregnated on the outside with carbonate of lead. (' On Poisons,' 2nd ed. p. 505.) Snuff and tobacco, cho- colate, and other su>)stances in ordinary use, are frequently wrapped in spuriou.s tin-foil. If the articles are kept in a damp place, they may thus become impregnated with carbonate of lead. In a case which was under Dr. Rees at Guy's Hospital, in January 1861, no source of lead could be traced, although the symptoms were those of chronic lead-poisoning, and lead Avas found in the urine. Cosmetics and hair-dyes containing preparations of lead, may also produce dangerous effects. I have met with an instance in which paralysis of the muscles on one side of the neck arose from the imprudent use of a hair-dye containing litharge. Mr. Lacy has pointed out the injury to health which is likely to follow the use of white lead as a cosmetic by actors. The glazed white leather lining of hats is strongly impregnated with carbonate of lead, which may penetrate the body by the perspiring skin. Other facts connected with this form of lead-poisoning, will be Ibund in the 'Medical Times and Gazette,' Aug. 1852, p. 223 ; ' Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1859, vol. 1, pp. 95 and 290: also 'Ann. d'Hyg.,' 1861, vol. 1, pp. 342 and 389. Sj/mptoms and Appearances.—The symptoms of chronic poisoning by lead are well marked. There is at first pain with a sense of sinking commonly in or about the region of the navel (the seat of the colon). Next to pain there is obstinate constipation, retraction of the abdominal parietes, loss of appetite, thirst, foetid odour of the breath, and general emaciation, Avith paralysis of a ])eculiar kind affecting the extensor muscles, and causing a dropping of the Avrist, or showing itself in a general paralysis of the limbs. The skin acquires a sallow or earthy colour, generally well marked in the face, and the patient experiences a sweetish, styptic, or astringent taste in the mouth. A symptom of a peculiar nature was first pointed out by the late Dr. Burton (' Med. Gaz.' vol. 25, p. 687), namely, a bluenessof the edges of the gums, where these join the bodies of the teeth: the teeth are of a brownish colour. Dr. Chambers affirms that this blue line on the gums is an early consequence of lead-poison- ing in any form, and is a distinguishing sign of lead-colic. A gas engineer, who had worked for eighteen years in his trade, had during this time used a quantity of red and white lead for various purposes. It was, however, onlv Avithin the last eighteen months of his Avork that he had suffered from the usual symptoms of lead-poisoning. (' Lancet,' Jan. 21, 1860, p. 60.) It is Avorthy of note, that although this person had been so many years exposed to the


[305/1290 b21964944_0305.jp2]

NOXIOUS EFFECTS OF WATERS CONTAINING LEAD. 241 causes of lead-disease, he did not suffer from any symptoms mitil the latter part of the time. A bkie mark round the edges of the gums has been noticed in some cases of poisoning by mercurial preparations; and it is possible that in an advanced stage of chronic poisoning by lead, it may be absent—as where, for example, the individual has ceased to expose himself to emanations of lead (see case by Mr. Fletcher,' Med. Times,' Feb. 14, 1846, p. 395). Many facts tend to show that in general it is an early symptom. Chronic poisoning by lead often kills the patient; after death the large and small intestines have been found much contracted, and their coats thickened. These changes have been especially observed in the colon. The most frequent cause of clu-onic lead-poisoning is the use of water kept in leaden cisterns or pipes, or the careless employment of Avhite or red lead as a cement for pipes. It has been recently suggested that leaden pipes and surfaces may be protected from the chemical action of water, and water pre- served from a poisonous contamination, by a very simple expedient. Lead which has been immersed for a short time in a hot solution of sulphide of sodium, acquires a protective coating of sulphide scarcely visible to the eye. A bar of lead thus prepared and well dried, was placed in water which was known to exert a chemical action on the metal in a few hours, and after four ■weeks' immersion, there was no lead in the water which could be detected by sulphuretted hydrogen. For an instructive series of cases showing the effects of water poisoned with lead, I must refer the reader to a paper, by Dr. de Mussy, published in the ' Dublin Quarterly Joui-nal' for May 1849 ; also ' Medical Gazette,' vol. 44, p. 260. These cases occurred at Claremont, among the mem- bers of the ex-Royal Family of France. The effects were traced to the use of pure water which had acquired an impregnation of lead by contact with that metal, in the proportion of one grain to the imperial gallon. Thirteen out of thirty-eight persons were affected, and to such a degree, that the nails of the toes and fingers acquired a bluish discolouration. The children of the family did not suffer. This is perhaps the smallest quantity of lead in water accurately recorded to have produced the effects of poisoning. No symptoms appeared until after the Avater had been in use for a period of fi-om five to seven months, and more than half of those who used the water, escaped any ill effects. According to Mr. Herapath, the symptoms of lead-poisoning have been produced in a com- munity by so small a quantity as one ninth of a grain of lead in a gallon ; and Dr. J. Smith, of Aberdeen, concludes from his investigations that the limit of manifestly deleterious action, would seem to be somewhere between one tenth and one twentieth of a grain in a gallon (Dr. Penny, ' Report on Loch Katrine Water,' p. 107). Waters collected from lead-mining districts generally con- tain lead either in suspension or in solution. In one of these proposed to be supplied to Wrexham in North Wales, I found the proportion of lead to be one eleventh of a grain in a gallon, a quantity which might prove noxious to some portion of a town population, as a result of long-continued use. A medical officer of health deposed before a Committee of the House of Lords, in May 1864, that there was less than one fourteenth of a grain of lead in a gallon, and that this proportion, if present, would do no injury, while any proportion below one twelfth of a grain would be noxious, although the data upon which this sharply defined distinction was based, were not made public. As it has been resolved that this plumbeous water shall be supplied to, and used by, a population of 7,000 persons, an opportunity will no doubt present itself of testing on a large scale the effects of minute quantities of lead on the system. A water which acts chemically on the metal may aoon cease to act by reason of a hard deposit taking place in the interior of the pipes, and it then sheathes the metal from further chemical action. When the water, before entjering the pipes, is already provided with so much lead that it easily admits of R


[306/1290 b21964944_0306.jp2]

242 ARTICLES OF FOOD ACCIDENTALLY POISONED BY LEAD. detection in a pint, it will be always more or less impregnated with salts of this metal, and therefore more or less noxious to health. A safe sanitary rule would be that suggested by Dr. Penny. All lead-contamination is objectionable, and no degree of it can be considered safe. Lead is an accumulative poison, and affects some persons powerfully in the .smallest quantities. In 1850, it was proposed to refine sugar by the use of a salt of lead. It was found that the proportion of lead-salt contained in sugar refined by this process varied fi-om two tenths to four tenths of a grain in four pounds. The Commissioners of Inland Revenue, considering that this small quantity might affect the public healtli, referred the consideration of the question to the late Dr. Pereira, Dr. Carpenter, and myself. We came to the conclusion that even this degree of contamination of such a universal article of food as sugar, was objectionable, and that such a process of manufacture should be as far as possible prohibited. For an account of the various conditions under which Avater is liable to be lx)isoned with lead, and the effects produced by the use of such water, I must refer the reader to my work * On Poisons,' p. 506. Analysis.—Carbonate of lead is a solid white powder, insoluble in water, and immediately blackened by suJphuretted hydrogen or sulphide of ammonium. 1. When heated on platinum, it leaves a residue of yellow or orange- coloured oxide of lead, soluble in nitric acid. 2. The carbonate is easily dis- solved with effervescence, by diluted nitric acid—a fact which shows that it contains carbonic acid. The oxide of lead, combined with nitric acid, may be readily detected in the filtered solution by the tests already mentioned. This salt of lead is sometimes contained in small proportion in loaf sugar, owing to the moulds in which the loaf is set to crystallize being painted with white lead, and a portion being thus mechanically taken up. This is a noxious practice, and ought to be prohibited. Water Avhich is suspected to contain a small quantity of this compound, may be tested for lead by the process described for the tissues at p. 238. At least an Imperial pint should be made the subject of experiment. Oxides of Lead.—The yellow oxide (massicot), and the brown oxide (peroxide), are but little known except to chemists. Litharge and minium or red lead are, however, much employed in the arts, and have sometimes given rise to accidental poisoning. In October, 1849, a woman who had swalloAved two and a quarter ounces of the red oxide of lead, was admitted into Guy's Hospital. No symptoms appeared for nine hours. There was then colicky pain, with urgent vomiting, followed by head-ache and general tenderness of the abdomen. She entirely recovered in about twelve days. (' Guy's Hospital Reports,' October, 1850, p. 209.) Liquids used for culinary or dietetic purposes, especially if they contain a free acid, are liable to become impregnated with oxide of lead, derived from the glaze of the vessel in which they are kept, and thus form poisonous salts. If vinegar is used, acetate of lead may result. Litharge-glaze is also easily dissolved by alkaline or fatty substances. The eating of dripping, or the fat of meat baked in a newly-glazed vessel, has been known to give rise to a slight attack of colic; while the symptoms were referred by the person to some substance mixed with the food. (For cases of this kind see the 'Medical Gazette,' vol. 47, page 659; also 'Lancet,' 1860, vol. 1, p. 962.) I am indebted to Mr. Procter, of York, for the particulars of a case of some novelty, in reference to the contamination of food with lead. In July, 1852, four men partook of rhubarb-pie and milk for supper; shortly afterwards they were all seized with violent vomiting and intense colic. A portion of the vomited matters and food was examined by Mr. Procter, and lead was


[307/1290 b21964944_0307.jp2]

POISONING BY BLUE VITRIOL. 243 detected in them. The only source to which the lead could be traced, was the glaze of the pans in which the milk was kept. Cider ia sometimes poisoned with lead owing to the use of leaden vessels or pipes in its manu- facture. An instance of the fatal effects of cider so poisoned, is reported to have occurred in Worcestershire in January, 18G4. Lead pipes are largely used by publicans for the supply of beer. It is possible, therefore, if the beer is acid, and is allowed to remain some time in the pipe, it may acquire an impregnation of lead, which might give rise to colic and other unpleasant symptoms. When liquids of this kind are impregnated with oxide of lead, the fiict is immediately known by their being turned of a brown colour by sulphuretted hydrogen. All newly-glazed vessels yield traces of lead, more or less, on boiling in them vinegar, pure acetic acid, or a solution of pure potash. In this manner the poisonous nature of the glaze may be tested:—-the oxide of lead being dissolved either by the acid or the alkali. I have found common acetic acid itself containing, as impurity, two per cent, of acetate of lead. I have also found lead in citric and tartaric 'acids, and in salts which have been crystallized in leaden pans. Litharge was formerly much used to remove the acidity of sour ivine, and to convey a sweet taste. Acetate of lead, or some other vegetable .salt of the metal, is in these cases formed; and the use of such wine may be productive of alarming symptoms. Many years since a fatal epidemic colic prevailed in Paris, owing to this cause : the adulteration was discovered by Foiu-croy, and it was immediately suppressed. Wine thus poisoned is known by its being blackened by sulphiu-etted hydrogen. Snuff has been adulterated with red lead in order to improve its colour ! Two instances of chronic poisoning by lead have come imder my notice, as a result of the presence of oxide of lead in snuff. One sample contained the oxide in large proportion. This noxious adulteration has frequently given rise to paralysis and other forms of lead-disease. (' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 32, p. 138; also 'Ann. d'Hygiene,' 1831, vol. 2, p. 197; and 'Lancet,' Jan. 21, 1860, p. 60.) Dr. Sonnenkalb, of Leipsic, considers that snuff commonly acquires an impregnation of lead, by reason of the coverings of lead in which it is packed. He has collected nineteen cases of this form of chronic poisoning : in fourteen of these there was paralysis, and in five there were symptoms of gastric dis- turbance. The arms were most commonly affected with paralysis in the extensor muscles, which Avasted. In twelve cases there Avas a blue colour of the gums. All suffered from colicky pains and constipation. The poisoned snuff had been used for a period of from six months to twenty years : and on leaving it off, the patients improved rapidly, and eventually recovered. PliKPARATIONS OF COPPEK. All the salts of copper are poisonous. The two most commonly knoAvn in commerce are the Sulphate or Blue Vitkiol, and the Subacetate or Verdi- gris. The former has been frequently taken and administered in large doses for the purpose of suicide and in attempts at murder. In the latter case the attempt has been immediately discovered, owing to the strong metallic taste pos.sessed by the salt. This would in general render it impossible that the poison should be taken unknoAvingly. With the exception of these salts, poisoning by copper is usually the accidental result of the common employ- ment of this metal for culinary juirposes. There is one coi)per salt—the Aksenite (Scheele's Green)—Avhich chiefly oAves its poisonous properties to arsenic. This has been elscAvhere considered (page 217). K 2


[308/1290 b21964944_0308.jp2]

244 POISONING BY BLUE VITKIOL. Blue Vitriol. Sulphate of Copper. Symptoms.—^\\\^\\fite of copper lias been freqviently given for the pixrpose of procuring abortion. In doses of half an ounce and upwards, it acts as a powerful irritant on adults, and a much smaller quantity would suffice to destroy infonts or children. The salt speedily causes vomiting of the most violent kind; this sometimes expels the poison from the stomach, and the person recovers. The vomited matters are remarkable for being generally of a blue or green colour; and broken crystals of blue vitriol were discovered in them, in a case in which the poison was taken in a loosely pulverulent state. If the green colour of the vomited Uquids is owing to altered bile, it will not acquire a blue tint on adding to a portion of the green liquid a strong solution of ammonia; but if it be caused by a salt of copper, this chano-e of colour will serve to indicate the fact. There is head-ache, pain in the abdomen, with purging; the pain is of a colicky character; and in ao-o-ravated cases, there are spasms of the extremities and convulsions. Dr. Percival met with an instance in which violent convulsions were produced in a young female by two drachms of the sulphate of copper. Paralysis, insensi- bility, and even tetanus, have preceded death, when the poison was adminis- tered to animals. Among the symptoms casually met with in the human subject, may be mentioned jaimdice. This has been observed to attend poisoning by the sulphate, as well as by Scheele's green. The medicinal dose of sulphate of copper as an emetic, is from five to fifteen grains, and as a tonic from one to three or four grains. There are but few instances in which this poison has proved fatal in the. human subject. In 1836 a girl, sixteen months old, put some pieces of Blue stone (sulphate of copj^er), which were given to her to play with, into her mouth. In a quarter of an hour the child vomited a bluish-gi-een coloured' matter, with pieces of sulphate of copper in it; the skin was alternately cold and hot, but there were neither purging nor convulsions. The child died in four hou7'S, and was insensible before death, (' Medical Gazette,' vol. 18, p. 742.) Unfortunately no inspection of the body was made; and yet, in the event of murder being committed by the administration of this substance, it will be somewhat unreasonably expected that medical witnesses should be fully acquainted with the appearances produced by it in the stomach and bowels. Appearances.—In poisoning by the salts of copper, the mucous membrane of the stomach and intestines has been found more or less thickened and inflamed in the few fatal cases Avhich have been hitherto examined : the mem- brane has been also found eroded and softened in poisoning by verdigris. The gullet has presented an inflammatory appearance. In a case of poisoning by verdigris, quoted by Orfila, the stomach Avas inflamed and thickened, especially towards the intestinal opening, the orifice of which, from the general thickening, was almost obliterated. The small intestines were throughout inflamed, and perforation had taken place, so that part of the gi-cen liquid was effused into the abdomen. The large intestines were dis- tended in some parts, and contracted in others, and the rectum was ulcerated on its inner sui-flice. (' Toxicologic,' vol. 1, p. 623.) The lining membrane of the alimentary canal has been found throughout of a deep green colour, owing to small particles of verdigris adhering to it. It has been said that this is an uncertain character of poisoning by copper; since a morbid state oft' the bile often gives a similar colour to the mucous membrane of the stomach i and duodenum. This objection cannot apply when the green colour is foundl in the gullet, and throughout the intestines; and, under any circumstances,. the evidence fi-om the presence of a green colour would amount to nothing ini the judgment of a prudent witness, unless copper were freely detected in thee parts so coloui-ed. It is Avell to remember that the green stain, if due too copper, will be turned blue by ammonia.


[309/1290 b21964944_0309.jp2]

POISOXING BY COPPER. TESTS. 245 Verdigris. Suhacetate of Copper.—This- salt produces si/mjjtovis somcAvhat similar to those caused by the sulphate. There is a strong styptic metallic taste, with a sense of constriction in the throat, followed by severe colicky pains, vomiting of a green-coloured liquid, and purging, with violent straining (tenesmus). In a case reported by Pyl, a woman who swallowed two ounces of verdigris died in three days: in addition to the symptoms above described, there were convulsions and paralysis before death. Niemann relates that a female, aged twenty-four, swallowed half an ounce of verdigris, and died under symptoms of severe irritation of the stomach in sixty hours. (' Taschen- buch,' p. 458.) In consequence of the great uncertainty of its operation, subacetate of copper is not employed internally. The SuBCiiLORiDE and Carbonate are also irritant poisons. Chemical Analysis of the Salts of Copper.—The salts of copper are gene- rally known by their colour; whether in the solid state, or in solution, they are either blue or green. The salts of one other metal are also of a green colour, namely nickel; but there are striking chemical differences between the salts of this metal and those of copper. There are three very soluble salts of copper J two of these are blue, the sulphate and nitrate, and one green, the chloride. The solutions of the cupreous salts have generally an acid re- action. The salt should be dissolved in w^ater, diluted, and the following tests may then be applied. Tests.—1. Solution of amvionia: this gives, in a solution of copper, a bluish- white precipitate, which is soluble in an excess of the test, forming a deep violet-blue liquid. 2. Ferrocyanide of potassiuvi gives a rich claret-red pre- cipitate ; if the quantity of copper is small, the liquid acquires merely a light-red colour; if large, the precipitate is of a deep red-brown colour, and of a gela- tinous consistency. The ferrocyanide of potassium will act on the violet-blue solution produced by ammonia, provided it is diluted, and an acid is added (sulphuric) to neutralize the ammonia. One portion of the liquid may thus be tried by the two tests. 3. Sulphuretted hydrogen gas, or sulphide of ammonium, gives a deep chocolate-brown precipitate, even in an acid solution ; or if the copper is in small proportion, merely a light-brown colour. 4. A slip of polished iron (a common needle) suspended by a thread in the liquid slightly acidu- lated with sulphuric acid is speedily coated with a layer of copper, even when the salt is in very small proportion. If the needle is left for some days in the liquid, the iron will be slowly removed, and a hollow cylinder of metallic copper will remain. This may be dissolved in diluted nitric acid, and tested with the foregoing tests; or the iron coated Avith copper, may be at once im- mersed in ammonia and exposed to air. The liquid then becomes slowly blue. Half a grain of sulphate of copper dissolved in sixteen ounces of water may be thus easily detected. It was long since proposed by Orfila to substitute phosphorus for polished iron. This substance most effectually separates metallic copper from its salts, even when they are dissolved in organic liquids. 5. The Gal- vanic Test.—If a few drops of the copper solution are placed on platinum-foil, slightly acidulated with a diluted acid, and the platinum is then touched through the solution with a thin slip of zinc-foil, metallic copper, of its Avell- known red colour, is immediately deposited on the' platinum. When the quantity of copper is small, there is merely a brown stain; but a blue liquid is formed by pouring on it ammonia, and exposing it to air. A coil of fine platinum and zinc wire may be substituted for the foil. Copper in Organic Liquids.—The oxide of copper is liable to be precipitated by certain organic principles, e. g. albumen, fibrin, and mucous membrane: but some of these organic compounds are easily dissolved by acids, or even by an excess of the solution of cupreous salt. A portion at least of the salt of copper is, therefore, commonly held dissolved. In such cases there is one


[310/1290 b21964944_0310.jp2]

246 ARTICLES OF FOOD POISONED BY COPPER. peculiar character possessed by these liquids, i. e. they have a decidedly green colour even when the copper salt is in a far less than poisonous proportjon. The sulphate of copper, used in medicine and chemistry, sometimes contains traces of arsenic. About ten grains of the crystallized sulphate will be suffi- cient to yield evidence of the presence of this poison. When the sulphate has been given as an emetic, traces of arsenic may be found in the contents of the stomach or in the matters vomited. A polished needle or fine iron wire may be used as a trial-test for the presence of the salts of copper. If in large quan- tity, the copper may be precipitated by sulphuretted hydrogen, the sulphide collected, dried, and converted into a soluble sulphate by the action of strong nitric acid. If in small quantity, the following is the most expeditious method of obtaining copper from any organic liquid which contains a soluble poisonous salt of this metal. Having filtered the liquid, let a portion of it be placed in a clean platinum capsule or crucible. A few drops of diluted sulphuric acid may be added, and a slip of zinc foil introduced. Wherever the platinum is touched by the zinc, metallic copper is deposited ; and after having in this way coated the platinum capsule, the surplus liquid may be poured off and the capsule well washed out. The copper is then dissolved in nitric acid, and the tests may be applied after the excess of acid has been driven otf by heat. In the Tissues.—Dry and incinerate the organic matter. Digest the resi- duary ash in pure hydrochloric acid by heat, and then evaporate nearly to dryness. The residue may be dissolved in a small quantity of water, and a polished needle immersed for some hours. The metallic deposit, if any, on the needle, may be recognized as copper, either by its colour or by the action of ammonia. Copper in Articles of Food.—The medico-legal history of poisoning by copper would be incomplete without some remarks on the action of certain articles of food on this metal, when it is used for culinary purposes. This is not an unfrequent form of accidental poisoning. The symptoms rarely appear until after the lapse of three or four hours. There is commonly nausea, with colicky pains and cramps in the limbs. It results from the experiments of Falconer and others, that metallic copper undergoes no change by contact Avith ivater, unless air is present, when a hydrated carbonate, mixed witli oxide of copper, is formed. If the water contains any acid such as vinegar, or common salt, or if there is oily or fatty matter in contact with the metal, then the copper is more rapidly oxidized, and the liquor or fat acquires a green colour. If the copper vessel is kept perfectly clean, and the food pre- pared in it, is allowed to cool in other vessels, there is not much risk of its acquiring a poisonous impregnation: nevertheless, no acid, saline, fatty, or oily liquid should be prej^ared as an article of food in a copper vessel. (See 'Ann. d'Hyg.' 1832, vol. 1, p. 102.) Under the influence of heat and air, a portion of copper becomes dissolved, and the oily or other liquid acquires a green colour. The preparation of fruits, such as preserves, in copper vessels, is necessarily attended with some risk; for, on cooling, a green crust is apt to form on the copper, just above the surface where the air and acid liquid meet. Some liquids while boiling, appear to be but little liable to this impregnation : thus, coffee, beer, milk and tea, have been separately boiled for two hours together, in a clean copper vessel, without any portion of the metal being taken up by either of the liquids. (See ' Falconer, on the Poison of Copper,' 65, London, 1774, also ' Orfila,' vol. 1, p. 611. ) Accidents of this kind are usually prevented by lining the copper vessel with tin; but in very large boilers, this plan is not always adopted—cleanliness alone is trusted to, and this, when properly observed, is a sufficient preventive. According to Paasch, of Berlin, many of the accidents attributed to this form of cupreous


[311/1290 b21964944_0311.jp2]

247 POISONING BY TARTAR EMETIC. poisoning are really due to other causes. (Casper's ' Vierteljahrsclirift,' 1852, B. i. H. i. S. 78.) It has been elsewhere stated that all the ordinary copper employed for culinary utensils, contains arsenic (page 92). In those cases in which the metal is converted into insoluble oxides or salts, by salts, acids or fat, the arsenic may be found in an insoluble form in the green in- crustation produced. When copper thus forms an insoluble salt, I have not found any arsenic dissolved. It has been stated that an impure alloy used by some of the lower class of dentists has been so largely composed of copper, as to affect the health of those who have used the plates for the sxapport of artificial teeth. The acid and salts in the saliva facilitate the production of a poisonous salt of copper, and probably set free arsenic. In the making of presei-ved fmits and vegetable pickles, the salts of copper (blue vitriol) are sometimes used for the purpose of giving a rich green colour. Many of the green pickles sold in shops are thus impregnated with the vege- table salts of this metal, to which they owe their bright grass-green colour. If the fruit or pickle is placed in a solution of ammonia, and copper is con- tained in it, the substance is speedily turned blue. The iron-test is, however, more delicate. A bright needle immersed in the pickle, or plunged into the solid, will be speedily coated with copper. The quantity of copper contained in such articles may not be sufficient to cause fatal effects; but serious symptoms of gastric irritation are sometimes produced, and in young persons these may assume an alarming character. (See 'Falconer,' 87.) CHAPTER 21. TARTAR EMETIC SYMPTOMS APPEARANCES CHRONIC POISONING CHEMICAL ANALYSIS CHLORIDE OR BUTTER OF ANTIMONY POISONING BY SULPHATE AND CHLORIDE OF ZINC PREPARATIONS OF TIN SILVER—GOLD IRON BISMUTH AND CHROMIUM BICHROMATE OF POTASH THALLIUM IODINE. Tartar Emetic. Tartarated Antimony. Stibiated Tartar.—Symptoms and Effects.—When this substance is taken in a poisonous dose, a strong metallic taste is perceived in the mouth during the act of swallowing. There is great heat and constriction of the throat, with difficulty of swallowing, violent burning pain in the region of the stomach, followed by incessant vomiting, profuse purging, faintness, and extreme depression. The pulse is small and rapid, sometimes imperceptible ; the skin cold, and covered with a clammy perspiration; and the respiration is painful. Should the case prove fatal, death may be preceded by giddiness, insensibility, great prostration of strength, and sometimes violent spasms of the muscles of the extremities, ■which may assume either a clonic or a tetanic character. Such are the symptoms in an acute case of poisoning by this substance. The quantity actually required to destroy life is unknown. It will probably depend in some degree on whether active vomiting and purging have been excited or not; for these symptoms have not been present in all cases. Doses of from twenty grains to one ounce have been taken without destroying life, although alarming symptoms of irritation have followed. In one case, related by Orfila, a man, aged fifty, took forty grains of tartar emetic, and died in about four days. This was the only one out of five cases of poisoning by this substance quoted by Orfila which proved fatal. (' Orfila,' vol. I, p. 480.) Dr. Beck mentions a case in which fifteen grains of tartar emetic in solution killed a child in a few weeks : vomiting and purging ensued, followed by convulsions and death. This case proves that a patient is not always saved


[312/1290 b21964944_0312.jp2]

POISONING BY ANTIMONY. SYMPTOMS. 248 "by vomiting and purging : the fatal effects on such an occasion are probably due to rapid absorption. (See ' Medical Gazette,' vol. 44, p. 334.) Dr. Pollock has recorded a case in which an adult was killed in ten hours by a dose of one drachm, in spite of early and violent vomiting. (' Med. Gaz.' vol. 45, p. 801.) In two cases observed by Mr. Hartley, which will be presently -described, ten grains killed each child in a few hours. A dose of four grauis, however, has been known to j^roduce alarming symptoms. Dr. Lambert, who reports this case in ' Casper's Wochenschrift,' states that this dose gave rise to violent pain in the abdomen, vomiting, and purging. The patient then fell into strong convulsions, which lasted half an hour. He became speechless, no pulse could be perceived, the skin was cold, and it was supposed that he was dead. Stimulating frictions and poultices Avcre employed, and he slowly recovered in about fourteen days. This poison, administered in small doses, may occasion death by reason of its exerting a depressing influence on the action of the heart. Aged persons, or those who are debilitated by disease, may die imder these circumstances fi'om a medicinal dose or doses which would produce no injury to strong and healthy adults. The effects, however, should be clearly traced to the action of the poison, and not be owing to exhaustion as a result of disease. In February, 1853, Mr. AYakley referred to me, for examination, a case in Avhich it was supposed that two doses of antimonial wine, equal to about three grains of tartar emetic, had caused the death of a man who was in a diseased condition, by its remote effects upon the heart. No trace of poison was found iu the stomach or tissues; there were no symptoms to indicate poisoning, and under these circumstances, death could not be reasonably attributed to the medicine. The man died in about twenty hours, probably from exhaustion of the vital powers as a result of diaease, and not from the action of this substance. In a case reported by Mr. Freer, of Stourbridge, a man, set. 28, swallowed tivo drachms of tartar emetic by mistake for Epsom salts, and re- covered from its effects. An hour after the poison had been taken he was found in the following state :—his pulse imperceptible ; tongue dry and red ; countenance cold and livid, bathed with clammy perspiration, and indicative of great suffering; violent pain in tlie stomach and over the whole of the abdomen, with constant spasmodic contraction of the muscles, particularly of the abdomen and arms. The fingers were firmly contracted, and the muscles qviite rigid. He vomited only once, about half an hour after he bad swallowed the poison, and after this, he had constant involuntary aqueous purging. An emetic of mustard and salt was given to him, and this produced violent vomit- ing of biliou.s matter. Green tea, brandy, and decoction of oak-bark were freely given. The cramps, vomitings, and aqueous purging continued for six hours. The symptoms then became mitigated, and he gradually recovered, suffering chiefiy from-profuse night perspirations. ('Lancet,' May 22nd, 1847, 535.) This case is remarkable for the anomalous character of the .symptoms, as, in the absence of active vomiting, an "emetic was actually re- quired to be given, and also for the recovery of the individual after a large dose of the poison. In the 'Association Medical Jotmial' for April 1, 1853, at page 281, will be found reported a case in which a physician took half an ounce of tartar emetic by mistake for Rochelle salts. Vomiting did not come on for half an hour ; but under good medical treatment, he recovered in a few days. In another case fifty-five gi-ains caused the death of an adult in sixteen hours. In one instance a small dose of this substance caused death by pro- ducing intestinal hasmorrhage. (See the same Journal, June 10, 1853, p. 513.) Mr. Procter, of York, communicated to me, in July 1860, the cases of four children to whom, by mistake, a mixture of sulphur and tartar emetic -had been given. An ounce of sublimed sulphur and one drachm of tartar


[313/1290 b21964944_0313.jp2]

249 POISONING BY ANTIMONY. APPEARANCES. emetic had been divided among the four. The symptoms presented the same characters in each; early vomiting which became violent and incessant, pain in the bowels, purging, great thirst, cold clammy perspiration, feeble pulse, cramps of the limbs and twitchings of these parts, with great depression. There was no sense of heat or constriction in tlie throat, and no difficulty of swallowing. Under treatment they all recovered. Appearances.—The following cases, reported by Mr. Hartley, show the nature of the appearances likely to be found after death. Two children, a boy aged five years, and a girl aged three years, each swallowed a powder containing ten grains of tartar emetic mixed with a little sugar. It was stated that, in twenty minutes after taking the powders, they were seized with violent vomiting and purging, and great prostration of strength, followed by convulsions and tetanic spasms ; there was also great thirst. The boy died in eight hours, and the girl in twelve or thirteen hours after swallowing the dose. The bodies were inspected between four and five days after death. In that of the boy tlaere was eff'usion of serum in the right pleura; the lower lobe of the right lung posteriorly was redder than natural, and the peritoneum was injected from recent inflammation. The mucous membrane of the duodenum was inflamed, and covered with a whitish-yellow viscid secretion; this was observed thi'oughout the intestines, although the colour was of a deeper yellow in the large intestines : there was no ulceration. The peritoneal coat of the stomach was inflamed. The mucous membrane of this organ was also much inflamed, especially about the larger curvature and at the cardiac orifice : there was no ulceration. The contents (about two ounces and a half of a dark bloody fluid, having a slightly acid reaction) were adherent to it; and in one case there was a patch of lymph. The tests used did not indicate the presence of antimony. With regard to other appearances, the tongue was covered with a white fur, and appeared soddened; the throat was not in- flamed ; the wind-pipe and gullet had a natural appearance. On opening the head the dura mater was found congested; the longitudinal sinus contained a coagulum of lymph, and but little blood. The vessels of the surface of the brain Avere much injected with dark blood, the whole surface having a deep purple colour. Every portion of the brain, when cut, presented many bloody points. The cerebellum and medulla oblongata were also congested; there •was no effusion in the ventricles or at the base of the brain. In the body of the girl the morbid appearances Avere similar : there were in addition on the arms, legs, and neck, patches resembling the eruption of scarlatina. The arachnoid membrane was more opaque than usual; and on the mucous membrane of the stomach, where the inflammation was greatest, were two or three white spots, each about the size of a split pea, which appeared to be the commencement of ulceration. (' Lancet,' April 25, 1846, 4G0.) A girl, ajt. 16, swallowed a dose of tartar emetic amounting to from forty to sixty gi-ains. There was severe vomiting in a quarter of an hour, and this was soon followed by purging: these symptoms continued for about three hours. She also complained of pain, and a burning sensation down the gullet. The vomited matters were of a dark colour. On the following morning she had recovered from the severity of the symptoms ; but in the afternoon there Avas a relapse. She continually threw her head back and screamed ; the skin Avas ■warm and moist ; the pupils were dilated; and the knees drawn up. She died in about thirty-six hours after taking the poison, and during the six or eight hours previous to her death, she was quite delirious. An inspection was made thirty-six hours after death. The throat appeared sAvollen ; the lungs Avere slightly congested ; the heart Avas healthy, and contained about six drachms of fluid blood. The stomach contained sixteen ounces of a thick bloody fluid: at the greater extremity the coats Avere softened, and blood


[314/1290 b21964944_0314.jp2]

TARTAR EMETIC. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 250 was effused under the mucous coat in several places. The small intestmes contained a similar fluid, with much mucus; but there was no appearance of inflammation. Only slight traces of the poison were found in the contents of the stomach by the usual tests, the greater part having probably passed off by vomiting and purging. (Mr. Beale, in ' Lancet,' Jan. 21, 1854.) In animals poisoned by this substance. Dr. Pavy and I have found general inflammation of the lower part of the intestines. It has been hitherto supposed that the cases in which this poison has proved fatal have been few; but I have elsewhere reported thirty-seven, of which sixteen were fatal. The smallest fatal dose was in a child,—i/iree quarters of a grain, and in an adult, two grains; but in this instance there were circumstances which favoured the fatal operation of the poison. (' Guy's Hospital Reports,' Oct. 1857.) Chronic Poisoning.—A good account of the effects produced by tartar emetic, given at intervals in small doses to healthy persons, has been published by Dr. Mayherhofer (' Heller's Archiv.,' 1846, pts. 2, 3, 4, page 100, et seq.) The principal symptoms are,—great nausea, vomiting of mucous and bilious liquids, great depression, watery purging, followed often by constipation of the bowels, small, contracted, and frequent pulse, loss of voice and muscular strength, coldness of the skin, with clammy perspiration, and death from complete exhaustion. Several cases have occurred in this country, which show that tartar emetic has been thus criminally employed. In addition to the cases of Ann Palmer and J. P. Cook, there are those of Reg. v. M'^Mullen, Liverpool Summer Assizes, 1856 ; Reg. v. Freeman, Drogheda Spring Assizes, 1857 ; and the cases of the James family at Liverpool {Reg. v. Winslow, Liverpool Autumn Assizes, 1860.) The prisoner Winslow was indicted for the murder of his mistress, Ann James. It was clearly proved that antimony had been administered to the deceased, not only by the careftil discrimination of the symptoms made by Dr. Cameron, but by the detection of the poison in the urine during life by Dr. Edwards. The deceased was at the time labouring under malignant disease affecting the csecum and stomach, but that her death had been accelerated by antimony, there could be no doubt. The prisoner was acquitted owing to the difficulty of proving the act of administration. The poison had been given at intervals in small doses, and as deceased survived about a fortnight after the last dose, it was found only in traces in the various organs. The death of this woman led to the exhumation of the bodies of three of her relatives who had lived in the same house with her and the pri- soner, and had died suddenly some months previously under suspicious cir- cumstances. The viscera of these bodies were examined by Dr. Edwards, Dr. Miller, and myself, and in each case antimony was found in small quan- tity but still extensively diffused through the organs. There was no reason to suppose that they had taken this antimony voluntarily, and there is no reason to doubt, so far as the history of their cases could be obtained, that they were victims to chronic poisoning by antimony. This was the only cause of death, but it was not suspected at the time. (See ' Guy's Hospital Reports,' October, 1857, and October, 1860; also Reg. v. Hardman, Lancaster Summer Assizes, 1857.) Chemical Analysis. Tartar Emetic as a Solid.—In the state of powder it is ■white and crystalline. It has been occasionally sold by mistake for tartaric acid with soda powders, and sometimes for cream of tartar.—1. It is easily dissolved by water,—it is taken up by fourteen parts of cold, and two of boiling water; the solution has a faint acid reaction, and an acrid metallic taste ; it is decomposed by long keeping. It is insoluble in alcohol. 2. The powder dropped into sulphide of ammonium is turned of a deep reddish-brown colour, and is thereby known from other poisonous metallic salts. 3. When


[315/1290 b21964944_0315.jp2]

251 ANTIMONY IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS. heated in a reduction-tube, it is charred, but does not melt before charring, like the acetate of lead. The metal is partially reduced by the carbon of the vegetable acid, and the decomposed mass has a greyish-blue metallic lustre. I have not found that a metallic sublimate is produced in this experiment by the heat of a spirit-lamp. 4. When boiled in water containing one-sixth of pure hydrochloric acid, and metallic copper is immersed in the liquid, a grey deposit of antimony takes place on this metal. The colour of the deposit is violet red if the quantity is very small, but the deposit is black and pulverulent if very large. 5. The solution acidulated with one-tenth part of hydrochloric acid gives in the cold a black deposit on a surface of pure tin. A slip of pure tin-foil may be used in this experiment. Tartar Emetic in Solution.—1. On slowly evaporating a small quantity on a slip of glass, it will crystallize in tetrahedra, and in deriva- tives of the oct<ahedron. If obtained from a very diluted solution, this crystallization is con- fused, and resembles that of arsenic. 2. Diluted nitric acid added to the solution, throws down a Avhite precipitate (sub-nitrate of antimony) ; the other two mineral acids act in the same way; but, as they precipitate numerous other metallic solutions, there are objections to them which do not hold with respect to nitric acid. The white precipitate thus formed possesses Crystals of Tartar Emetic magnified the remarkable property of being easily and thirty diameters, entirely dissolved by a solution of tartaric acid : it is also soluble in a large excess of nitric acid, so that if much of the test be added at once, no precipitate is produced. 3. Ferrocyanide of potassium does not precipitate the solution, whereby tartarized antimony is known from most other metallic poisons. 4. Sulphide of ammonium or sulphuretted hydrogen gas, produces in the solution a reddish orange-coloured precipitate, differing in colour from every other metallic sulphide. The precipitate is not soluble in ammonia, but is dissolved in the dry state by strong hydrochloric acid. The only test available when the quantity of antimony present is small, is sulphuretted hydrogen gas. The foregoing tests, it will be observed, merely indicate the presence of oxide of antimony, but this is in reality the poison which we have to seek, —the cream of tartar with which it is combined being merely the vehicle ; and in a case of poisoning, this is no more the object of medico-legal research than if it were the vehicle for the administration of arsenic or corrosive subli- mate. It is, besides, well known that tartarized antimony is the only salt of the oxide of antimony in a soluble form which is likely to be met with in medicine or chemistry. Should it be required to prove the presence of cream of tartar, this may be done by filtering the liquid from which the oxide of antimony has been entirely precipitated by sulphuretted hydrogen gas. On evaporating this liquid, the cream of tartar may be obtained. In Liquids containing Organic Matter.—Tartar emetic is precipitated by tannic acid in all its forms, but not readily by albumen or mucous membrane ; therefore it may be found partly dissolved in the liquids of the stomach, provided no antidote has been administered. The liquid should be filtered, and then strongly acidulated with tartaric acid. A current of sulphuretted hydrogen gas is now passed into it, until there is no further precipitation. The sulphide is collected, washed, and dried. If it is the sulphide of antimony, it will have an orange-red or brown colour, it will be insoluble in a solution of ammonia, and when dried, will be dissolved by a small quantity of boiling hydrochloric


[316/1290 b21964944_0316.jp2]

DETECTION OF ANTIMO.VY IN THE TISSUES. 252 acid (forming chloride of antimony) with the evohltion of sulphuretted hydrogen gas. The boiling should be continued for several minutes until the liquid is colourless. On adding this solution, if not too acid, to water, a white precipitate of oxychloride of antimony (powder of Algaroth or Algarotti, ■ Mercurius Vitce) falls down. This is characteristic of antimony. A portion of the sulphide, dissolved in hydrochloric acid, may be introduced with pure zinc and sulphuric acid into a Marsh's tube or ajjparatus, like that described at page 210. The gas which escapes at the jet produces a deep black deposit on paper impregnated with a solution of nitrate of silver ; but unless sulphur is present it produces no change on paper impregnated Avith a salt of lead. When ignited, it burns Avith a pale yelloAvish-white flame, producing white fumes of teroxide of antimony. Porcelain, or glass, depressed on the flame, receives a black deposit of reduced metallic antimony, Avith greyish-coloured layers of oxide at the circumference. There is no metallic lustre, such as is produced by arsenic, under similar circumstances, but on examining the reverse side of the glass, a dim metallic lustre Avill be perceptible. This deposit, xinlike arsenic, is not dissolved by chloride of lime. If a current of the gas is heated to redness in a tube, a tin-Avhite ring of metallic antimony Avill be deposited close to the heated spot. This is much more fixed than the deposit of arsenic, and cannot, like it, be resolved into a Avhite sublimate of octahedral crystals. If the gas is made to pass through a small quantity of fuming nitric acid con- taining nitrous acid, it is decomposed, the antimony is peroxidized, and may be obtained as a Avhite, insoluble residue on evaporation. A solution of nitrate of silver produces no change of colour in this deposit; but if one or tAvo drops of ammonia are added, there is a black precipitate of antimonide of silver. The folloAving method of detecting antimony, Avhen dissolved in any organic liquid, is based upon the principle by which copper and other metals may be detected under similar circumstances (page 246). Acidulate a portion of the suspected liquid Avith hydrochloric acid, and place it in a shallow platinum capsule. Touch the platinum, through the acid liquid, Avith a piece of pure zinc foil. Hydrogen is evolved, and Avherever the metals come in contact, metallic antimony, in the state of a black powder, is deposited upon the surface of the platinum. The liquid should be poured off, and the capsule thoroughly washed Avith distilled Avater. This may be effected without disturbing the deposit. A small quantity of sulphide of ammonium poui-ed on the black deposit, speedily dissolves it (if antimony) by the aid of heat, and on evapo- ration, an orange-red sul2:)hide of antimony remains. This may be dissolved by a feAV drops of strong hydrochloric acid, and on adding the acid liquid to water, hydrated oxychloride of antimony is precipitated. By this process antimony in small quantity may be detected in any liquid containing organic matter. Lithe Tissues.—The antimony may be in so small a quantity, asitisdeposited in the organs, that neither the sulphuretted hydrogen nor the galvanic process will yield any satisfactory results. The liver or other organ should be finely cut up, and boiled in a mixture of one part of hydrochloric acid, and five parts of Avater. After some time, the liquid may be tested by introducino- into it a slip of polished copper foil fi.-ee from antimony. If antimony is present in small quantity, the copper will acquire a reddish or violet-coloured deposit on its surface: if in large quantity, the deposit Avill be grey Avith a metallic lustre, or sometimes in the state of a black powder. These deposits do not yield octahedral crystals like those obtained from arsenic. A slip of pure tin-foil may be suspended in the cold, in another portion of the acid liquid, diluted so that the hydrochloric acid forms only one-tenth part by measure. Either immediately, or in the course of a few hours, if antimony is present, the tin is covered with a black deposit of metallic antimony. As


[317/1290 b21964944_0317.jp2]

DETECTION OF ANTIMONY IN THE TISSUES. 253 arsenic is not deposited on pure tin under similar circumstances, this furnishes a ready method of detecting the admixture of antimony with arsenic. These may be regarded as trial tests. For the demonstration of the presence of antimony, when in mere traces, we may resort to the following process, by which antimony may be completely separated from organic substances. Coil a portion of pure zinc-foil round a portion of clean platinum-foil, and intro- duce the.two metals into the hydrochloric-acid decoction of the tissues, just sufficiently diluted to prevent too violent an action on the zinc. (See illus- tration, p. 227.) Warm the organic liquid, and suspend the coils in it. Sooner or later, according to the quantity of antimony present, the platinum will be coated with an adhering black powder of metallic antimony. Wash the platinum-foil, and digest it in strong nitric acid. So soon as the black deposit of antimony is dissolved from its surface, the platinum may be removed. Add a few drops of nitric acid, and evaporate the acid liquid to dryness. The residue, redissolved in hydrochloric acid, and the solution diluted and treated with a current of sulphuretted hydrogen, will yield an orange-red sulphide of antimony. This black deposit of antimony is readily dissolved from platinum by sulphide of ammonium, yielding on evaporation, an orange-red sulphide of antimony, and it is also soluble in nitrohydrochloric acid, but not in hydro- chloric acid alone. When kept for a few days in contact with water and air, the black metallic deposit is sometimes converted into white oxide of antimony, and entirely disappears. A medical jurist must remember that the discovery of tartar emetic in the contents of a stomach is by no means a proof of its having been taken or ad- ministered as a poison ; since it ia frequently prescribed as a medicine, and oflen taken as such by persons of their own accord. We could only suspect that it existed as a poison, or had caused death, when the quantity present was large, and there were corresponding appearances of irritation in the stomach and bowels. The presence of any quantity, if not lawfully administered as a medi- cine, is always a suspicious fact, and demands explanation. In two cases of criminal administration in small doses, the quantity found in each body, did not exceed three grains. The mere discovery of it in a medicinal mixture cannot of itself be evidence of an intent to poison. The separation of antimony from the tissues does not necessarily indicate that it has been criminally administered or has caused death ; but its presence should be reasonably accounted for, as antimony may have been unlawfully administered. In several cases of suspected death from poison, deposits on copper, evidently of an antimonial nature, have been obtained from the liver or tissues. On inquiry it has been found that antimonial medicines had been taken shortly before death. Conversely, when no antimony is found, or the metal is present in the tissues in minute quantity, it is still consistent with medical experience and observation that the person may have died from anti- mony. The case of Mrs. Peters, of Yeovil (July, 1860), furnishes a recent and remarkable illustration of this fact. This lady had symptoms during- her illness which were referred by her medical attendants to the effects of small doses of antimony. Antimony was found in the urine both by them as well as by Mr. Herapath : but after death {i. e. in about nine days) no antimony was found in the tissues or any part of the body. Upon this fact and the evidence of coexisting disease, it was alleged that she had died from disease and not from poison. The jury returned a verdict to the effect that her death had been accelerated by irritant poison. (' Med. Times and Gazette,' Aug. 25, 1860, p. 190; Sept. 15, p. 271 ; and Sept. 29, p. 317.) Assuming the results of the analysis of the urine during life to be correct, there can be no question that antimony was administered to her; and the.


[318/1290 b21964944_0318.jp2]

254 CHLORIDE OR BUTTER OF ANTIMONY. fitatement of the acceleration of death is rendered probable. The case is im- jjortant in this respect ; it shows that antimony may be found in an evacua- tion and that death may be accelerated by it; but although the person may die within nine days, none will be detected in the body. Chloride or Butter of Antimony.—Symptoms and Ajrpearances.—A boy, aged twelve, swallowed by mistake for ginger beer four or five drachms of a solution of butter of antimony. In half an hour he was seized with vomiting, which continued at intervals for two hours. There was faintness, with general weakness, and great prostration of strength. Eemedial means were adopted, and the next day the chief symptoms were heat and uneasiness in the mouth and throat, with pain in swallowing. There were numerous abrasions on the mucous membrane of the mouth and throat; and there was slight fever, from which the boy quite recovered in about eight days. Another case of recovery from a dose of an ounce is reported in the ' Lancet,' Feb. 26, 1848, p. 230. I am indebted for the following case to Mr. Mann. An army surgeon swallowed, I'or the purpose of suicide, irom two to three ounces by measure of chloride of antimony. About an hour afterwards he was seen by Mr. Mann. There was entire prostration of strength, with coldness of skin, and incessant attempts to vomit. The most excruciating griping pains were felt in the abdomen ; and there was a frequent desire to evacuate the bowels, but nothing was passed. In the course of a few hours reaction took place, the pain subsided, and the pulse rose to 120. There was now a strong disposition to sleep, so that he appeared as if labouring under the effects of a narcotic poison. In this state he continued until he died, ten hours and a half after he had swallowed the poison. On inspection the interior of the alimentary canal from the mouth downwards to the jejunum, presented a black appearance, as if the parts had been charred. In general, there was no mucous membrane remaining, either on the stomach or elsewhere; only a flocculent substance, which could be easily scraped off with the back of the scalpel, leaving the submucous tissue and the peritoneal coat. All these parts were so soft that they were easily torn by the fingers. Analysis.—1. If any portion of the chloride is left in the vessel, it may be tested by adding a few drops to a large quantity of water, when the whitish- yellow oxychloride of antimony will be precipitated: the supernatant liquid will contain hydrochloric acid, which may be detected by nitrate of silver. 2. The precipitated white oxychloride is dissolved by a solution of tartaric acid. 3. This acid solution is precipitated of an orange red colour by a cm-rent of sulphuretted hydrogen gas. In the Tissues.—Any antimonial compound may be dissolved out of the coats of the stomach or other structures, by boiling them in hydrochloric acid. The solution when cold may be diluted with nine parts by measure of water, and a slip of pure tin foil suspended in the liquid. A black deposit on the tin, after sufficient contact, indicates the presence of antimony. The metal may be then separated by platinum and zinc, according to the method described at page 253. Preparations of Zinc. White Vitriol. Sniphate of Zinc. Symptoms and Appearances. The symptoms produced by an over-dose of sulphate of zinc are pain in the abdomen and violent vomiting, coming on almost immediately, followed by purging. Afiier death the stomach has been found inflamed. The sulphate appears to act as a pure irritant; it has no corrosive properties. This salt may cause death indirectly as the result of exhaustion from violent vomiting, when an ordinaij dose has been given to a person already debilitated by disease.


[319/1290 b21964944_0319.jp2]

255 EFFECTS OP CHLORIDE OF ZINC. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' July 16, 1853, p. 78.) Dr. Gibb has reported a case of poisoning by this substance, in which a lady recovered after taking sixty-seven grains. (' Lancet,' May 17,1856.) A case is reported by Dr. Ogle, in which it is supposed that it destroyed life by its slow or chronic effects. (' Lancet,' Aug. 27,1859, p. 210.) Neither the sulphate nor the oxide of zinc can be re- garded as powerful irritants. In cases of epilepsy Dr. Babington gave sulphate of zinc in doses of two scruples, three times a day, having at first commenced with small doses. No ill-effects followed, and none of the usual symptoms of irritation were observed. This may have been owing to a tolerance of the medicine. With respect to the oxide of zinc, Dr. Marcet states that he has prescribed it in lai'ge doses without injury to health. One patient, an epileptic, took as much as one pound in seven months, the largest quantity taken in one day being seventy grains. Although he did not suffer from the remedy the disease Avas not cured. ('Lancet,' March 1, 1862, p. 224.) Analysis.—The pure sulphate is seen in white prismatic crystals, closely resembling in appearance sulphate of magnesia and oxalic acid ; from oxalic acid it is distinguished by remaining fixed when heated on platinum-foil,—from the sulphate of magnesia, by tests applied to its solution. It is readily dis- solved by water, this fluid taking up about one-third of its weight at common temperatures. Analysis of the solution.—The solution has a slightly acid reaction. The following tests may be used for the detection of oxide of zinc. 1. Ammonia gives a white precipitate, soluble in an excess of the alkali. 2. Carbonate of ammonia, a white precipitate, also soluble in a large excess of the test. 3. Ferrocyanide of potassium, a white precipitate. 4. Sulphuretted hydrogen and sulphide of ammonium, a milky-Avhite precipitate, provided the solution is pure and neutral, or nearly so. If the solution is very acid, sulphuretted hydrogen produces no effect Avhatever. In Organic Mixtures.—If the sulphate of zinc is dissolved and the solution is not too acid, we may pass into it a current of sulphuretted hydrogen gas; the presence of zinc is immediately indicated by a milky-white froth: the sulphide may be collected, and decomposed by boiling it with hydrochloric acid. The solution may be then tested for zinc. This compound being frequently employed as an emetic, may be innocently present in an organic liquid, or in the contents of the stomach. Chloride of Zinc.—The chloride of zinc is sold to the public as a disin- fectant, under the name of ' Sir W. Burnett's Fluid.' This is a highly con- centrated solution of the pure, or sometimes impure, chloride of the metal; it has been taken by accident in several cases, and in one instance was supposed to have been criminally administered as a poison. Symptoms.—In a case reported by Dr. Stratton, about two ounces of a solution containing only twelve grains of the chloride were swallowed. The patient immediately felt pain and nausea; vomiting followed, and she re- covered, but suffered from some indisposition for three weeks. In a second case, a wine-glassful, equivalent to at least two hundred grains of solid chloride, Avas swalloAved. The man instantly experienced a burning pain in the gullet, burn- ing and griping pain in the stomach, great nausea, and coldness. Vomiting came on in two minutes ; the legs were drawn up to the body; there Avas cold perspiration, Avith other signs of collapse. The man perfectly recovered in sixteen days. ('Ed. Med. and Surg. Journal,' Oct., 1848, p. 335; and * British American Journal,' Dec, 1848, p. 201.) Other cases show that the concentrated liquid has a strong corrosive action, destroying the mem- brane of the mouth, throat, gullet, and stomach. There has been froth- ing of the mouth, Avith general lividity, and coldness of the skin. In a case in which only a mouthful of the fluid had been sAvalloAved, the patient experi- enced giddiness and loss of sight, Avith immediate burning heat in the stomach :


[320/1290 b21964944_0320.jp2]

256 POISONING BY CHLORIDE OF ZINC. APPEAEANCES. vomiting and purging came on, and the former symptom continued for a week. There was so much irritability of the stomach for a period of three weeks, that the patient became greatly reduced. Among the early symptoms was loss of voice, which did not return for five weeks. (' Med. Times,' Oct. 11, 1851, p. 382 ; and Nov. 8, 1851, p. 497.) Dr. R. Hassall met with a case in which the nervous symptoms Avere strongly marked, and were of a peculiar kind. Three ounces of 'Burnett's Fluid' were swallowed. There was immediately a sense of constriction in the throat, with a hot burning sensation in the stomach. There was no pain in the mouth, and there was no appearance of corrosion in this cavity or on the lips. There was incessant vomiting, the vomited matters consisting of thick mucus, streaked Avith blood ; and some portion of mucous membrane was discharged. There was no purging until the third day, when the discharges from the bowels had a coffee-ground appearance. After the lapse of a fortnight, a train of nervous symptoms set in, indicated by a complete perversion of taste and smell. The patient re- covered in about three months. (' Lancet,' Aug. 20, 1853, p. 159.) A case which occurred to Dr. Markham proved fatal in about ten weeks after the poiaon had been swallowed. The patient, a woman, set. 46, took half a wine-glassful of Burnett's liquid, equal to about one hundred grains of chloride of zinc. Immediately after taking it, she suffered from vomiting and pain in the stomach. She drank freely of water : the vomiting ceased in a few days, and she appeared to have recovered. In about three weeks the vomiting returned : it was incessant, and with this there was pain in the stomach. She sank exhausted, evidently from the secondary effects of the poison. (' Medical Times and Gazette,' June 11, 1859, p. 595.) Appearances after Death.—In the case of an infant, aged fifteen, months, who died from the effects of this poison, the lining membrane of the mouth and throat was white and opaque. The stomach was hard and leathery, con- taining a liquid like curds and whey. Its inner surface was corrugated, opaque, and tinged of a dark leaden hue. The lungs arid kidneys were con- gested. The fluid of the stomach was found to contain chloride of zinc. ('Med. Times,' July 13, 1850, p. 47.) These facts show that the concen- trated solution of chloride of zinc is both a corrosive and an irritant poison, exerting also occasionally an action on the nervous system. In a case which proved fatal at Guy's Hospital, in 1856, the coats of the stomach were exces- sively thickened, and had a leathery consistency. In Dr. Markham's case, the stomach was so constricted at the intestinal end by a cicatrix that it would only admit a crow-quill. The opening was involved in this cicatrix, which Avas about one quarter of an inch Avide. There Avas no other sign of disease in the body. This case proves that death may occur from this poison even afler apparent recovery. The chloride of zinc may destroy life either by producing stricture of the gullet or pylorus, or by its chemical action on the lining membrane of the stomach leading to a loss of poAver of digestion, emaciation, and exhaustion. In 1863 several deaths were reported to have taken place in consequence of Burnett's Fluid having been mistaken for medi- cine. In one of tliese a lady sAvalloAved a wine-glassful in place of fluid magnesia. She suffered severely, and died from the secondary consequences of the poison, after six Aveeks. In another, a girl, ajt. 17, SAvalloAved half a Avine-glassful of the fluid, and died from the effects in less than tAA-o hours. The symptoms here were copious vomiting of frothy mucus AA^th shreds of membrane, and cramps in the legs, which were draAvn up to the abdomen. Analysis.—The chlorine may be detected by nitrate of silver the zinc by the tests above described. (See Sulphate.) All the samples which I have examined contained iron.


[321/1290 b21964944_0321.jp2]

POISONIXG BY TIN, SILVER, GOLD AXD IROX. 257 Zinc can be detected in the tissues only by incineration and an examination of the ash. The chloride is, however, sometimes used for the preservation of the dead body. This might account for its occasional presence. Preparations of Tin. The only preparations of this metal which re(}uire to be noticed as poisons are the Chlorides, or Muriates, a mixture of which is extensively used in the arts, under the name of Dyer's Spirit. The salts may exist in the form of whitish-yellow crystals ; but more commonly they are met with in a strongly acid solution in water. They are irritant poisons; but so seldom used as such, that only one death occurred from them in England and Wales dui-ing a period of two years. Preparations of Silver. Nitrate of Silver. Lunar Caustic. Lapis Infernalis.—This substance, which is commonly met with in small sticks of a white or dark-grey colour, is readily soluble in distilled water; in common water it forms a milky solution. It acts as a powerful coiTOsive, destroying all the organic tissues with which it comes in contact. There are at least two cases on record in which it has proved fatal in the human subject: one of these occurred in 1837-8, but the particulars are unknown. The symptoms come on immedi- ately, and the whitish-flaky matter vomited is rendered dark by exposure to light. Dark-coloured spots on the exposed parts of the skin will also indicate the nature of the poison. In September, 1861, a woman, get. 51, died in three days from the effects of taking a six-ounce mixture containing fifty grains of nitrate of silver (lunar caustic) given in divided doses. She vomited a brownish-yellow fluid before death. The stomach and intestines were found inflamed. It is stated that silver was found in the substance of the stomach and liver. Preparations of Gold. Perchloride.—This is the only preparation of gold which requires notice. It is a powerful irritant poison, acting locally like the nitrate of silver. Nothing is known of its poisonous effects on man; but, in administering it to animals, Orfila found that it caused extensive inflammation, and even ulceration, of the mucous membrane of the stomach. ('Toxicologic,' vol. 2, p. 30.) The metal is absorbed and carried into the tissues, but its poisonous action appears to be wholly independent of absorption. Preparations of Iron. Sulphate of Iron. Copperas. Green Vitriol.—This compound has been several times administered with malicious intention. One death from it took place in 1837-8. It cannot, however, be an active preparation; for a girl who swallowed an ounce of it recovered, although she suffered for some hours from violent pain, vomiting, and purging. (' Christison on Poisons,' p. 50G.) Green vitriol or copperas is sometimes given as an abortive. A suspicious case is reported, in which a woman far advanced in pregnancy, but enjoying good health, was suddenly seized at midnight with vomiting and purging, and died in about fourteen hours. The body, which had been buried, wa.s disinterred, and iron found in large quantities in the viscera. The symptoms are not always of this violent kind. In a case which occurred to M. Che- valier, a man gave a large dose of sulphate of iron to his wife. There was neither colic nor vomiting. The woman lost her appetite, but ultimately recovered. In another case reported by the same authority, a woman Avas tried and convicted of poisoning her husband with sulphate of iron: but in S


[322/1290 b21964944_0322.jp2]

POISONING BY PREPARATIONS OF IRON. 258 conseqixence of the great diversity of opinion among the scientific witnesses at the trial respecting the poisonous properties of this metallic salt, and tJie dose in Avhich it Avould be likely to operate injuriously, the Court and Jury recommended that the sentence of death should not be carried into execution. ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1851, vol. 1, p. 155 ; 'Med. Gazette,' 1850, vol. 4o, p. 640 ) The reader will find some remarks in reference to the action of the sulphate of iron on the body, by the late M. Orfila, in the same Journal, 1851, vol. 2, p. 337. At the Nottingham Autumn Assizes, 1859, a woman of the name ol Eiletj was indicted for administering copperas to two children. She put the substance into gruel. It gave to the gruel a greenish colour and a peculiai- taste, which led to the discovery. It caused sickness, but no other serious symptoms. As there was no evidence of an intent to murder, and it was then not unlawful to administer poison with any other intent, the prisoner was acquitted. This salt has been much used for criminal purposes in France. (See 'Medical Gazette,' vol.47, p. 307: also 'Ann. d'Hyg.' 1850, vol 1, pp. 180, 416 ; and 1851, voh 1, p. 155; vol. 2, p. 337.) Sulphate of iron is said to have proved fatal to sheep. It had.been mixed with the pulp of beet- root for cattle food. (' Med. Times and Gazette,' 1863, vol. 1, p. 511.) Muriate of Iron. Tinctut^e of Perchloride of Iron.—This is an acid solution of perchloride of iron in rectified spirit: it is of a red-brown colour, and is much used in medicine. It is sometimes made with Avood-spirit or methylated spirit, which gives to it a peculiar odour. Dr. Christison relates an instance in which a man by mistake swallowed an ounce and a half of this liquid : the symptoms were somewhat like those produced by hydrochloric acid. He at first rallied, but died in about five Aveeks. The stomach Avas found partially infiamed, and thickened towards the intestinal end. A case was reported to the Westminster Medical Society, in November 1842, in which a girl, get. 15, five months advanced in pregnancy, swallowed an ounce of the tincture of muriate of iron in four doses in one day, for the purpose of inducing abortion. Great irritation of the whole urinary system followed ; but this Avas speedily removed, and she recoA^ered. In another case, reported by Mr. Amyot, a healthy married Avoman sAvalloAved, by mistake for an aperient draught, one ounce and a half of the tincture of muriate of iron. She immediately ejected a portion, and A'iolent retching came on which continued for some time. There Avas great swelling of the glottis, Avith cough, and difficulty of sAvalloAving. These symptoms Avere folloAved by heat and dryness of the throat, with a pricking sensation along the course of the gullet and stomach ; and in the afternoon a quantity of dark liquid blood Avas vomited. The motions Avere black, OAving doubtless to the action of sulphur upon the metal. In about a month the patient Avas perfectly restored to health. ('Provincial Journal,' April 7 and 21, 1847, p. 180.) Another case of recovery from a large dose has been reported by Sir James Murray. The patient, £et. 72, SAvalloAved by mistake three ounces of the tinc- ture in a concentrated state. The tongue s-^on became swollen; a ropy mucus flowed fi^-om the mouth and nose; there Avas croupy respiration, Avith a sense of impending suflx)catiou. The pulse was feeble, the skin cold and clammy, and the face swollen and livid. A castor-oil mixture brought aAvay inky evacuations, and the patient rapidly recovered. (' Dub. Med. Press,' Feb. 21, 1849.) From the occurrence of these cases of recovery, it Avould be a mistake to infer that this is not a noxious compound. The largeness of the dose has commonly led to early vomiting, and the rejection of the greater part of the acid liquid. B.-sides, it varies much in strength, and unless this is defined in any given case, it is difficult to draw an inference of the actual quantity taken. . Comparatively small doses may seriously affect .pregnant females, and


[323/1290 b21964944_0323.jp2]

259 rOISONIXG BY BISMUTH. among the criminal uses to which this preparation is put, may he mentioned that of procuring abortion. At the Lincohi Lent Assizes, 18G3 {lieg. v. Rumble) a druggist was convicted of having supplied this noxious liquid to a woman with the intent to procure her miscarriage. He directed her to take a teaspoonful three times a day, and at the same time had prescribed for lier, eight pills a day, each contraning half a grain of powdered cantharides. Although the woman had taken only two doses of the tincture of perchloride of iron, she suffered from severe pain over the whole of the abdomen, Avith violent pain in the region of the stomach and bladder: there was constant vomiting of a greenish-coloured matter, and great pain in passing her urine. The quantity of urine secreted was small, and contained much blood. These symptoms were in gi-eat part due to the cantharides. The proper dose of the iron-tincture is from ten to forty mimims. Here it had been greatly exceeded without any lawful excuse on the part of the prescriber. Chemical Analysis.—The hydrochloric acid may be detected by nitrate of silver and nitric acid, while the peroxide of iron is immediately indicated by a precipitate of Prussian blue on adding a solution of Ferroa/anide of potas- sium. The quantity present may be determined by evaporation. Preparations of Bismuth. Suhniirate of Bismuth. Pearl-White. Magistevy of Bismuth.—This sub- stance, in a dose of two drachms, caused the death of an adult in nine daj's. There was a strong metallic taste in the mouth, burning pain in the throat, with vomiting and purging, coldness of the surface, and spasms of the arms and legs. On inspection, the throat, windpipe, and gullet were found in- flamed ; and there Avas inflammatory redness in the stomach and throughout the intestinal canal. (' Sobernheim,' p. 335.) In a case mentioned by Dr. Traill, a man took by mistake six drachms of the subnitrate, in divided doses, in three days. He suffered from vomiting and pain in the abdomen and throat, but finally recovered. ('Outlines,'p. 115.) These cases are sufficient to prove that a substance which is but slightly soluble in water may exert a powerfully poisorous action. The oxide and subnitrate of bismuth, owing to imperfect washing, are frequently contaminated with arsenic in the form of arsenic acid. The symptoms produced by large doses have closely resembled those caused by arsenic, an-I as the medicinal subnitrate generally contains arsenic, the symptoms may have been due to this impurity. I found arsenic in com- paratively large proportion, in samples obtained from three respectable retail druggists. Only two specimens out of five were found free from this poison. The arsenic may be detected by dissolving the subnitrate in pure hydrochloric acid slightly diluted, and introducing it into Marsh's apparatus. The arse- nical flame is apparent on combustion, and the usual deposits may be obtained on glass and porcelain. The products of combustion may be col- lected and tested by the processes described at p. 205. This impurity of the subnitrate may modify a conclusion respecting the presence of traces of arsenic in a body Avhen bismuth has been administered medicinally. (See * Brit, and For. Med. Chir. Eev.' Oct. 1858.) Analysis.—The subnitrate is a whitish chalky-looking uncrystalline powder insoluble in water, dissolved by hydrochloric acid, and agjlin pre- cipitated white by dilution with water:—the white precipitate is insoluble in tartaric acid, and is blackened by a solution of sulphuretted hydrogen, or by sulphide of ammonium. A solution of the substance in nitric acid gives no precipitate with diluted sulphuric acid. s 2


[324/1290 b21964944_0324.jp2]

260 POISONING BY BICHROMATE OF TOTASH. Preparations of Chromium. Bichromate of Potash.—Well-observed instances of poisoning by this com- pound, wliicli is now extensively used in the arts, are rare; and therefore, the details of the following case, communicated to the ' Medical Gazette ' (vol. 33, p. 734) by Mr. Wilson of Leeds, are of practical' interest. A man, aet. 64, was found dead in his bed twelve hours after he had gone to rest: he had been heard to snore loudly during the night, but this had occasioned no alarm to his relatives. When discovered he was lying on his left side, his lower limbs being a little drawn up to his body: his countenance was pale, placid, and composed ; eyes and mouth closed ; pupils dilated ; no discharge from any of the outlets of the body; no marks of vomiting or purging, nor any stain upon his hands or person, or upon the bed-linen or furniture. The surface was moderately warm. Some dye-stulF, in the form of a black powder, was found in his pocket. On inspection, the brain and its mem- branes were healthy and natural; there was neither congestion nor effusion in any part. The thoracic viscera were equally healthy, as well as those of the abdomen, with the exception of the liver, which contained several hydatids. A pint of a turbid inky-looking fluid was found in the stomach. The mucous membrane was red and vascular, particularly at the union of the greater end with the gullet: this was ascribed to the known intemperate habits of the de- ceased. In the absence of any obvious cause for death, poison was suspected ; and on analyz- ing the contents of the stomach they were found to contain bichromate of potash. The dye- powder taken from the man's pocket consisted of this salt mixed with cream of tartar and sand. It is remarkable that in this case there was neither vomiting nor purging. The salt does not appear to have operated so much by its irritant proper- ties, as by its indirect effects on the nervous Crystals of bichromateof potash mag- system. This, however, is by no means an un- nified thirty diameters. They iiavo usual occiirreuce, even with irritants far more a deep orange-red colovir. /> i ^ i i i • t r. •. powertul than the bichromate of potash. A case has been communicated to me by Mr. Bishop, of Kirkstall, in which a boy re- covered from the effects of a dose of this salt only after the lapse of four ■ months. The first symptoms were pain, vomiting, dilated and fixed pupils, cramps in the legs, and insensibility. His recovery was due to early and active treatment. A report of this case will be found in 'Guy's Hosp Reports,' Oct. 1850, p. 214. There can be no doubt that bichromate of potash is an active poison. Mr. West has published a case from which it appears that a medical man, who had inadvertently tasted a solution of it, suff'ered from severe symptoms- resembling those of Asiatic cholera. ('Provincial Journal,' Dec. 24, 1851, p. 700.) _ Mr. Wood, of St. Bartholomew's Hospital, has furnished m'e with the particulars of a case in which two drachms of this substance destroyed the life of a woman in four hours. In the first two hours, she suff'ered from violent vomiting and purging, the vomited matters being of a yellow colour When admitted she was in a dying state, pulseless, unconscious, and breath-- ing slowly, and with great effort. The skin was cold; the lower lip swolleni and purple, and the tongue swollen. The chief appearances were, a darkc and liquid state of the blood; the mucous membrane of the stomach in great; part destroyed, of a dark brown colour approaching to purple; the duodenum; at Its upper part, of a florid red colour, and at its lower part, much cor-


[325/1290 b21964944_0325.jp2]

BY THALLIUM AND 10DIi\E. 261 Tugated, as well as the upper half of the jejunum. This salt has an irritant local action on parts from which the skin has been remoA'ed. (See ' Annales d'Hygiene; 1864, vol. 1, p. 83.) Anali/sis. —The bichromate may be recognized by its orange-red colour, as well as by the intense yellow colour which it gives to water when dis- solved. Its solution gives a deep red precipitate with nitrate of silver, and a pale yellow with nitrate of baryta. Preparations of Thallium. The salts of this newly-discovered metal are, according to M. Paulet, highly poisonous, although this does-not appear either from his own statement of their effects or from the experiments of M. Lamy. M. Paulet found that a dose of fifteen and a half grains of carbonate of thallium killed a rabbit in some hours. The animal suffered from disturbance of breathing, loss of muscular power, and general trembling of the limbs; it appeared to die asphyxiated. The salts of the metal operated through the skin and cellular membrane, therefore by absorption. Lamy dissolved seventy-five grains of the sulphate in milk, and he found that this quantity sufficed to destroy two hens, six ducks, two puppies, and a middle-sized bitch. The prominent symptoms in the dogs, were oppression of breathing, sjilivation, griping pains in the abdomen, the body being drawn up, with trembling and convulsions of the limbs, followed by paralysis. Vomit- ing and purging are not described among the symptoms. Two of the puppies did not die until four days after they had taken the poison. On opening the bodies of the animals, Lamy states that there was no mark of inflammation or other striking post-mortem appearance. In one experiment he found that a puppy died in forty hours from a dose of one grain and a half of the sulphate of thallium (' Chem. News,' Sept. 12 and 19, 1863). The salts are soluble, colourless, and nearly tasteless, and therefore may be easily administered. These statements of MINI. Lamy and Paulet are not in accordance with the views of the discoverer of the metal, Mr. Crookes. Although much exposed to the action of the fumes, the metallic vapour produced no particular effects upon him. He also swallowed a grain or two of the salts without injury. These have a local action on the hair and skin, staining the former, and rendering the latter yellow and horny. (' Chem. News,' Oct. 3, 1863, p. 161.) Analysis.—According to these experimentalists, the best and most certain method of detecting thallium or its oxide or salts, if used as poisons, is to dry and bum the viscera, when, by the aid of spectrum-analysis, the green band indicative of thallium will manifest itself in the spectrum, from the smallest quantity of the metal, in spite of admixture with other bodies. The history of thallium as a poison is at present very incomplete. The above facts do not show that it is an energetic substance. To the foregoing list of mineral irritant poisons may be added one which, although presenting a metallic appearance, is, strictly speaking, a metalloid, namely iodine. Iodine. Symptoms.—From experiments on animals, as well as from observation of its effects on man, iodine has a strong local action as an irritant on the stomach and bowels. In large doses, it occasions a burning heat in the throat, severe pain in the abdomen, with vomiting and purging; the vomited matters having the peculiar odour of iodine, and being of a yellow colour, except Avhen any farinaceous food has been taken, in which case they are blue, or even black. The fa2cal matters may also contain


[326/1290 b21964944_0326.jp2]

POISONING BY VEGETABLE IRKITANTS. 262 iodine if the poison has been taken in the solid state. Besides these symptoms, there is great tliirst, with anxiety, headache, giddiness, trem- bling and convulsive movements of the limbs, and fainting ; these last symptoms indicating that the poison has become absorbed. When taken lor some time in small doses, it gives rise to salivation, vomiting and purging, pain in the stomach, and cramps; the pulse becomes smaU and frequent ; there is a general wasting of the body ; and it has been observed that, in this form of chronic poisoning, certain glands are liable to become affected and diminished by absorption,—the breasts in the female, and the testicles in the male. Iodine produces these secondary effects (iodism), whether it is taken internally or applied externally. A woman swallowed by mistake one drachm of iodine dissolved in an ounce of alcohol. When seen soon after- wards, she complained of a violent burning pain in the throat and stomach, followed by retching and slight vomiting; pulse rapid and full; eyes promi- nent and suffused. Vomiting, promoted by diluents, brought no relief to the symptoms. She became much depressed, and died on the following day. There was no examination of the body. (' Prov. Jour.,' June 30, 1>S47, p. 356.) For a case of recovery from half a drachm, see * Med. Times and Gaz.,' Dec. 28, I8G1, p. GG9. Iodine is rarely used as a poison. In May, 1864, an attempt was made by a woman to poison a fellow-servant by mixing tincture of iodine with food in a plate. The remarkable discolouration of the farinaceous food which it pro- duced, led to suspicion, and prevented any ill effects from following. Iodine gives a blue, green, or dark colour to most organic liquids, and imparts to them a peculiar odour. It stains the skin and other organic substances yellow; the colour being removed by an alkali. When in strong solution, it is corrosive and destroys the parts which it touches; in this state it has been maliciously employed for throwing on the person. Appearances after Death.—As this is an irritant as Avell as a corrosive poison, the lining membrane of the gullet, stomach, and intestines is found inflamed and excoriated. In one instance, the mucous membrane near the pylorus, was corroded and detached in a space of two or three inches. Analysis.—The odour is sufficient to identify it. This may be concealed. by alkalies or alkaline substances. When heated, it sublimes in a purple vapour. The addition of a solution of starch produces a blue colour. It is very soluble \ in sulphide of carbon, forming a rich pink solution. The sulphide has even i the property of removing it from water and other liquids in which it is dis- • solved. It may thus be separated for chemical examination by decanting the; watery liquid from the sulphide which, on evaporation, leaves the iodine ini ciystals. VEGETABLE IRRITANTS. CHAPTER 22. VEGETABLE IRRITANTS ALOES — COLOCYNTH — GAMBOGE JALAP SCAMMONT SAVIN —CROTON OIL—CASTOR SEEDS—COLCHICUM HELLEBORE—OIL OF TURPEN- ■ TINE—OIL OF TAR —MOULDY BREAD—CAROB OR LOCUST BEAN. General Remarks.—The poisonous substances of an irritant nature which! belong to the vegetable kingdom are very numerous as a class; but it will here be necessary to notice only those which have either caused death, or have given rise to accidental poisoning.


[327/1290 b21964944_0327.jp2]

EFFECTS OF ALOES AND COLOCYNTH. 263 Aloes. Colocynth. Gamuoge. Jalap. Scammony. These different substances, which are used in small doses as medicines, are liable, when taken frequently or in large quantities, to excite vomiting, purging, and other symptoms of irritation. Colocyntli has occasioned death in several instances: in one case a teaspoonful and a half of colocynth powder destroyed life; and one drachm of gamboge, a medicine much used by quacks, has proved fatal to man. (Traill's 'Outlines,' 150.) Aloes and colo- cynth mixed are said to be the basis of a certain cjuack medicine sold under the name of Morison's Pills. These have proved fatal in many instances from the exhaustion produced by excessive purging, owing to the large quantity of these pills taken in frequently-repeated doses. Our knowledge of the symptoms and appearances produced by these irritants is, indeed, chiefly derived from the cases which have proved fatal under this pernicious treat- ment. In the seventeenth volume of the ' Medical Gazette' will be found four cases of this description. The most prominent symptom is excessive purging, with the discharge of large quantities of mucus; the individual becomes exhausted, and slowly sinks. In some instances, the symptoms are those of inflammation and ulceration of the bowels. In 1836, a man was convicted of having caused the death of a person by the administration of these pills; in this instance the death of the deceased was clearly due to the medicine, and on inspection the stomach was found inflamed and ulcerated, the mucous membrane of the small intestines was inflamed and softened, and there was the appearance of effused lymph upon it. An ingenious attempt Avas made in the defence to draw from the medical witness a statement that the good effects of some medicines invariably increased in proportion to the quantity taken. This was, however, very properly denied. The same remarks apply to Holloway's pills, although these are of a more innocent description. The principal ingredient in them is aloes. In all cases it must be remembered that these drastic purgatives may cause serious symptoms, or even death, when administered to infants, or to persons debilitated by age or disease; and it is not necessary that the dose should be very large in order that fatal effects should follow. The question here will be, whether the medicine caused death, or Avhether it simply accelerated it: although, in a legal view, that which accelerates, causes. Hierapicra {Holy hitter) is a popular aloetic compound, and one death is recorded to have been produced by it in 1837-8. There is reason to believe that it is occasionally used for the purpose of procuring criminal abortion. A man was tried and convicted of this offence at the Aylesbury Lent Assizes, 1857 {Reg. v. White), and the noxious properties of this compound then be- came a subject of inquiry. The dose, and the condition of the woman to whom it is administered, Avill of course affect the answer to this question. At the trial above mentioned, it was properly considered to be a noxious sub- stance Avithin the meaning of the statute. The fact that, under the name of Pulvis Aloes cum Caneltd, it Avas ibrmerly admitted into the British Phar- macopoeias, cannot justify the mischievous uses to which it may be put. Hierapicra is a snuff-coloured poAvder, of an intensely bitter taste. It con- sists of four parts, by Aveight, of aloes, and one part, by Aveight, of powdered Canella bark. The proper medicinal dose was formerly fixed at from five to fifteen grains. Its injurious effects on pregnant females are chiefly due to the aloes. This specially affects the rectum, and by. contiguity, under violent irritation or purging, may affect the uterus. From the taste and coloiu- which it imparts to liquids, it is not probable that it could be taken by a female un- knoAvingly. Death has been caused by aloes taken in nitric acid ; but in this case the


[328/1290 b21964944_0328.jp2]

264 EFFECTS OF SAVIN. CAYENNE PEPFER. mineral cacid was most probably the destructive agent. A singular case oc- curred in Germany a few years since, wherein a medico-legal question was raised respecting the poisonous properties of Aloes. A woman, set. 43, not labouring under any apparent disease, swallowed two drachms of powdered aloes in colFee. Violent purging supervened, and she died on the following morning, twelve hours after having taken the medicine. On inspection the stomach was found partially, and the small intestines extensively, inflamed. There were no other particular appearances to account for death, and this was referred to the effect of the aloes. Savin. (Juniperus Sabina.) This is a well-kno%vn plant, the leaves of which contain an irritant poison in the form of an acrid volatile oil of a remarkable odour. They exert an irritant action, both in the state of infusion and powder. They yield by distillation a light yellow oil, on which the irritant properties of the plant depend. The powder is sometimes used in medicine, in a dose of from five to twenty grains. Savin is not olten taken as a poison for the specific purpose of destroying life ; but this is occasionally an indirect result of its use as a popular means of procuring abortion. In this manner it appears to have proved fatal in one case in 1837-8. From the little that is known of its effects, it acts by producing violent Tips of the leaves of Savin magnified pain in the abdomen. Vomiting, and strangury, thirty diameters. ^f^gj. death, the gullet, stomach, and intestines, with the kidneys, have been found either much inflamed or congested. It has no action as an abortive, except, like other irritants, by causing a violent shock to the system, under Avhich the uteiais may expel its contents. Such a result can never be obtained withoiit placing in jeopardy the life of a woman ; and when abortion follows, she generally falls a victim. On the other hand, a female may be killed by the poison without abortion ensuing. In May 1845, I met with a case in which death had been caused by savin-powder,—abortion having fir.st taken place. Eight ounces of green liquid were found in the stomach, which, with the giillet and the small intestines, was highly inflamed. The poison was easily identified by placing some of the minute portions of the leaves found in the stomach, under a microscope. (' Med. Gaz.' vol. 36, p. 646.) The oil of savin is also powerfully irritant. For an account of this, see ' Criminal Abortion.' Cayenne Pepper. Capsicum. A trial for manslaughter, which has recently taken place at the Central Criminal Court (Reg. v. Stevens, May, 1864), renders it necessary to notice a substance much better known as a condiment, than as a vegetable irritant poison. In this case a medical botanist was charged with having caused the death of the deceased, a boy, set. 15, by administering to him dangerous medi- cines. The boy was sufiering from diseased hip-joint, and, after taking the medicines prescribed by the prisoner, he died. Dr. Letheby examined the stomach, and found in it patches of inflammatory redness, such as would be produced by an iiritant. He could detect no poison, but simply bilious matter mixed with cayenne pepper. The mixture prescribed by the prisoner con- tained this pepper, which the,witness considered to be injurious to a person in the condition of deceased. The prisoner Avas acquitted, the connexion of the death of deceased Avith his act, being probably considered by the jury as not proved.


[329/1290 b21964944_0329.jp2]

EFFECTS OF CROTON OIL. 2G5 In small qxiantities, this is a well-known stimulant and a useful condiment and medicine. It has a hot, fiery taste, which lasts for a long time on the parts which it touches. It is a powerful stimulant, and in large doses pro- duces difficulty of swallowing, pain in the stomach, and inflammation of the gullet and stomach. Locally applied, it causes redness and even blistering of the skin (Wibmer, Arzneimittel, Art. Capsicum.) There is no instance re- corded of its having proved fixtal. It owes its irritant properties to an acrid resin {capsicin), of which it contains 4 per cent. From five to ten gi-ains of the powder is considered to be a medicinal dose. Guinea Pepper, known as Grains of Paradise, is popularly considered to be highly noxious; but there are no fiicts to justify this view. This kind of pepper is properly regarded as an aromatic condiment. Croton Oil. This is an oil extracted from the seeds of the Croton tiglium. It is a powerful drastic purgative, producing, in a large dose, severe purging, collapse, and death. A case occurred in Paris, in 1839, in which a man swallowed by mistake two drachms and a half of croton oil. In three-quar- ters of an hour the surface was cold and clammy, the pulse imperceptible, breathing difficult, and the extremities and face were as blue as in the col- lapsed stage of cholera. In an hour and a half purging set in; the stools were passed involuntarily, and the abdomen was very sensitive to the touch. The patient complained of a burning pain in the course of the gullet. He died in four hours after swallowing the poison. There was no marked change in the mucous membran* of the stomach. (For another fatal case, see ' Pharm. Journal,' Feb. 1863, p. 379.) In Jime, 1850, I was consulted in a case in which it was supposed that this liquid had been employed for the purpose of destroying a horse. In this in- stance sixty drops had been sold, mixed with two ounces of linseed oil. In man, a dose of fi'om fifteen to twenty drops of the pure oil might give rise to excessive purging, and cause death by exhaustion. The cases recorded of its fiital operation are few, and do not enable us to solve this question from ob- served facts. According to Landsberg, as quoted by Christison (' Dispensatory,' p. 382), thirty drops of the oil have killed a dog; and Dr. Christison states that he has known four grains of the oil to produce an alarming degree of purging. It is frequently mixed with castor oil and other substances, and the presence of these must of course influence the dose required to act fatally. In the ' Medical Gazette' there is a report of a case in which a woman died from the effects of an embrocation containing croton oil, with other drugs. A teaspoonful was incautiously given to her : she immediately complained of a hot burning sensation in her throat. She was an aged person, and died in convulsions in three days. (' Med. Gaz.' vol. 43, p. 41.) A girl, a3t. 19, took by mistake a teaspoonful of a liniment consisting of equal parts of croton and olive oil. In about half an hour she was seen by Dr. Brydon, and she then complained of an intense burning sensation in the throat and gullet: but there was no pain in the stomach. Her pulse was 84. Vomiting came on in a severe form, and this was promoted by a zinc emetic and warm water. After the vomiting had continued for a quarter of an hour, she complained of a severe pain in the stomach. Purging was not a prominent symptom. In a day or two she recovered. (' Edinbui-gh Medical Journal,' Aug. 1861.) A case was recently tried at the Liverpool Winter Assizes (^e^f. v. ifas,S(?y and Ferraiul), in which the prisoners were charged with having caused the death of a man by placing in food, of which he and others had partaken, two drachms of powdered jalap, and from two to six drops of croton oil. Several persons,


[330/1290 b21964944_0330.jp2]

266 rilYSIC NUT. CASTOK SEEDS. COLCIIICLlr. including the deceased, sufFered from vomiting and purging ; but they reco- vered, and the deceased himself so far recovered as to be able to go about as usual. He was subsequently attacked with inflammation and ulceration of the bowels, from which he died. The prisoners were acquitted, as the medical evidence at the trial failed to make out the connexion of this subsequent ill- ness with the jalap and croton oil which had been put into the food. Physic Nut (Jatropha Curcas). The Jatropha Curcas is a West-Indian plant which produces seeds con- taining an acrid oil, having some of the properties of croton oil. Four seeds act as a violent cathartic, and severe vomiting and purging have been pro- duced by a few grains of the cake left after the expression of the fixed oil from the bruised seeds. The oil operates powerfully in a dose of from twelve to fifteen drops. It produces a burning sensation in the throat, vomiting, and purging, and other symptoms of irritation, followed by inflammation of the stomach, and bowels. In August, 1858, 139 children in Dublin sufFered from the effects of these seeds (' Medical Times and Gazette,' Aug., 1858) ; and in June 18G4, a number of boys at Birmingham sufFered severely from eating some of these nuts which they had found in a drug-store, but they all recovered. Castor Seeds. Of castor oil itself nothing need be said. It is not commonly knoAvn that the seeds fi-om which this oil is extracted, contain in the embryo an active poison, and that a few of them are sufficient to produce violent purging and death. The following is an instance of poisoning Jjy these seeds, the only one with which I have met. The deceased, est. Avas the sister of a gentleman who was at the time attending my lectures at Guy's Hospital. The deceased, it appears, ate about twenty castor-oil seeds; one of her sisters ate four or five, and another two. This Avas on a Wednesday evening. In the night they Avere all taken ill. About five hours after the seeds were eaten, the deceased felt fliint and sick; vomiting and purging came on, and con- tinued through the night. On the following morning she appeared like one affected with malignant cholera. The skin was cold and dark-coloured, the features contracted, and the breath cold ; the pulse was small and wiry ; there was restlessness, thirst, pain in the abdomen, and she lay in a sort of droAvsy, half-conscious state. Whatever liquid was taken was immediately rejected, and the matters passed by stool consisted chiefly of a serous fluid with blood. She died in five days without rallying ; the two other sisters recovered. On inspection, a large portion of the mucous membrane of the stomach was found abraded and softened in the course of the great ciirvature. A similar case, in which three seeds destroyed the life of a man in forty-six hours, is reported in the ' Med. Times and Gaz.,' May 25, 1861, p. 555. There was general redness of the organ, and the abraded portion presented the appearance of a granulating surface of a pale rose-colour; it was covered by a considerable (juantity of slimy mucus. The small intestines were inflamed, and the inner surface of them Avas abraded. The effects produced on the sisters Avho reco- vered, bear out the statement of Dr. Christison, that two or three of the seedn win operate as a violent cathartic. Meadow-Saffron (Colchicum). MeadoAv-safFron (Colchicum Autumnale) contains a poisonous alkaloid, . cokhicina—the effects of which on animals are similar to those of veratria, tha alkaloid existing in White Hellebore. The most noxious parts of the plant are the bulbs (or roots) and seeds, but the leaves and flowers have also an irritant action.


[331/1290 b21964944_0331.jp2]

267 POISONING BY COLCIIICUM. Symptoms and Appearances.—In November, 1839, a gentleman swallowed by mistake one ounce and a half of wine of colchicnm. He was immediately seized with severe pain in the abdomen : other symptoms of irritation came on, and he died in seven hours. No examination of the body was made! In another instance, in which an ounce of the yv'me was taken, death occurred in thirty-nine hours. (Schneider's 'Annalen,' vol. .1, p. 232.) In one case in Avhich this dose was taken, the pei-son recovered after suffering from cramps in the limbs and twitching of the tendons. (' L'Union Med.,' Aug. 24, 1848.) A woman, a;t, 56, suffering from rheumatism, for whom wine of colchicum had been prescribed, took by mistake an ounce of the wine of the seeds, in divided doses, in twelve hours. She suffered from nausea, violent and profuse vomiting, slight purging, with heat and burning pain in the throat, great thirst, cold clammy skin, feeble pulse, pain in the stomach, and pain in the forehead. Inflammation of the stomach supervened, and the retching, vomiting, thirst, and pain continued for three days. She then recovered. ('Amer. Jour. Med. Sci.,' Jan., 1857 ; and ' Brit, and For. Eev.,' vol, 19, 1857, p. 409.) In other cases profuse purging has been the most prominent symptom followed by death from exhaustion. (' Pharm. Joiir.' July, 18G1, p. 45.) In one instance, in which two ounces of the wine were taken, the symptoms did not come on for an hour and a half; there was then copious vomiting of a yellow fluid, severe pain with great tenderness in the abdomen, tenesmus and thirst. The patient died in forty-eight hours, without being convulsed or manifesting any sign of cerebral disturbance. The chief morbid appearance was a patch of redness in the mucous membrane of the stomach, near the cardiac orifice; the intestines were slightly inflamed. The head was not examined. (' Medical Gazette,' vol. 10, p. IGl; see also Casper, 'Ger. Med.,' p. 450.) A case of poisoning by the medicinal administration of colchicum, has been communicated to me by Mr. Mann, of Bartholomew Close. Three and a half drachms of the wine of colchicum were taken in divided doses, and caused death on the fourth day. There was no inflammation of the mucous membrane, but simply extravasa- tion of blood into the mucous follicles. The mucous membrane has been found softened in two cases of poisoning by the tincture. In two other cases, in which an ounce and a half of the tincture was taken, and death ensued in forty-eight hours, no morbid appearances were found. (Casper, ' Ger. Med.,' 1857, p. 451.) For a case of alleged poisoning by wine of colchicum, see Casper's ' Vierteljahrschrift,' 18G0, vol. 1, p. 1. Colchicum has acquired an evil notoriety as a poison chiefly owing to the evidence given at a trial which took place at the Central Criminal Court, in September 1862 {Reg. v. Catherine Wilson). This woman after having been tried and acquitted for an attempt to poison, with oil of vitriol, the wife of a man with whom she cohabited, was in the following September convicted of the murder of a Mrs. Soames, who had died suddenly while nursed by the prisoner six years previously. The body Avas exhumed, but no poison was found in the remains ; yet the medical and other circumstances, as well as the conduct and correspondence of the prisoner, proved to the satisfaction of the Court, that deceased had been destroyed by vegetable poison, most probably colchicum, with the noxious properties of which she was proved to have been well acquainted. From the facts which transpired in reference to this trial, it appeared that the deceased was one of four persons who had at different dates fallen victims to the acts of this woman. 1st, Peter Mawer. a master mariner of Boston, died in October 1854: the body was exhumed in 1862, but no poison Avas detected. 2nd, Mrs. Jackson, of Boston, who died in December 1859 : the body was exhumed in January 18G0, and no poison detected. 3rd, Mrs. Atkinson, of Kirkby Lonsdale, who died in October 1860 : the body was exhumed in May 1862, and no poison detected. 4th,


[332/1290 b21964944_0332.jp2]

268 EFFECTS OF HELLEBORE. the case of Mrs. Soames, above mentioned. All these persons died suddenly ■while in a state of health, under similar symptoms, and without any apparent natural cause to account for death. The symptoms as a whole were not reconcilable with any known disease; and they only appeared after the prisoner was'proved to have administered, under some pretence or other, food or medicine, the bottle which she employed for this purpose being kept locked up or in her own possession. The motive for the murder in each case, was the acquisition of money or property of Avhich the prisoner came into posses- sion,—in Peter Mawer's case by a will made shortly before his death, and in Mrs. Atkinson's case by an act of robbery after her death. Two other attempts at murder which failed, led to the inference that colchicum was the substance which this woman employed, either in wine or brandy. In these four persons, the symptoms were as nearly as possible of the same character— burning pain in the throat and stomach, intense thirst, violent vomiting and purging, coldness and clamminess of the skin, excessive depression and great Aveakness. The pvilse was small and weak, and death appeared to take place, without convulsions or loss of consciousness, from complete exhaustion. Ol" these persons, one died on the second, one on the fifth, one on the eighth, and one on the fourteenth day. In most of the cases, the poison was probably given in divided doses: in the last case, the symptoms always appeared every evening after the deceased had taken the tea prepared by the prisoner. Analysts.—Colchicum in the form of tincture possesses a warm aromatic taste and a peculiar odour. It owes its properties to the alkaloid colchicina, which is held dissolved by an acid. The process for detecting this substance consists in neutralizing with potash a portion of the aqueous acid solution (obtained by evaporating the alcoholic tincture) and then adding twice its volume of ether. The mixture should be well shaken. On pouring off the ether, and letting it evaporate spontaneously, an imperfectly crystalline or imcrystalline residue remains. (See ' Pharm. Jour.' 1857, p. 529.) When this is treated Avith one or two drops of concentrated nitric acid, the presence of colchicina is indicated by the residue acquiring a reddish violet colour- which soon disappears. Black, White, and Green Hellebore. Symptoms and Appearances.—According to Wibmer, the roots of the black hellebore possess the greatest activity : but the leaves are also highly poisonous when used in the form of infusion. By long boiling the poisonous properties of the plant are diminished, probably owing to the loss of the volatile principle, Avhich is an acrid oil. The roots and leaves have a local irritant action, pro- ducing violent vomiting and purging in small doses, Avith severe pain in the abdomen, followed by cold sAveats, convulsions, insensibility and death. The powdered root, in a dose of a fcAv grains, acts like a drastic purgative. In a case reported by Morgagni, half a drachm of the aqueous extract killed a man, jet. 50, in eight hours. The symptoms Avere severe pain in the abdomen and violent vomiting. After death the whole of the alimentary canal Avas foimd inflamed, but especially the large intestines. (Wibmer, op. cit. Helle- BOKUs.) A case quoted by the same writer, in Avhich a table-spoonful of the finely-powdered root (taken by mistake for rhubarb) caused severe symptoms of irritant poisoning, which did not disappear for four hours. The man recovered on the fourth day. The experiments performed by Orfila on animals, shoAV that this poison acts like a local irritant Avhen applied to a Avound. (Op. cit. vol. 2, p. 369.) Hellebore is a favourite remedy for Avorms with quacks and rural doctresses. It is not, therefore surprising that it should be occasionally administered in an overdose, and cause death. In December 1862, Dr. EdAvard's met with a case in Avhich a gentleman had swallowed experimentally one


[333/1290 b21964944_0333.jp2]

VICRATRIA. OILS OP TURPEXTIXE AND TAR. 269 drachm of tincture of green hellebore (veratrium viride), equal to twelve grains of the powder. He was found soon afterwards in a collapsed state, features sunk, skin cold, and covered with a profuse clammy sweat, pulse scarcely- perceptible. He complained of intense pain in the region of the stomach. There was no purging. These symptoms were relieved by treatment, and the next morning the patient had recovered. (' Med. Times and Gazette,' 1863, 1, 5.) Veratria.—"White hellebore owes its noxious properties to the alkaloid veratria, which is itself a powerful poison. The late Mr. Callaway communi- cated to me the following case. A physician prescribed medicinally for a lady, one grain of veratria divided into fifty pills, and three were directed to be taken for a dose. Not long after the dose had been swallowed, the patient was found insensible, the surface cold, the pulse failing, and there was every symptom of approaching dissolution. She remained some hours in a doubtful condition, but ultimately recovered. Supposing the medicine to have been well mixed, and the pills equally divided, not more than one-sixteenth of a grain of veratria was here taken ! This case proves that pure veratria is capable of exerting a powerful effect. The common veratria of the shops is sometimes given medicinally, in doses of one sixth of a grain. In the pure state, it forms a brownish-white uncrystalline powder, scarcely soluble in water even on boiling; but is more readily dissolved by alcohol and ether. It has a faint alkaline reaction, and easily combines with the acetic and other acids, forming soluble salts. It has a hot, acrid taste, without any bitterness. Strong nitric acid gives to it a light red, turning to an ochreous, colour. Diluted sulphuric acid, when heated with the powder, or a residue contain- ing veratria, produces an intense crimson-red colour. Veratria differs from colchicina in not being very soluble in water, and in the action of strong nitric as well as of diluted sulphuric acid. Oil of Turpentine. The few cases in which this liqiiid has produced any noxious symptoms have occurred among children. From these it appears to have rather the effects of a neurotic (narcotic) than an irritant poison. In a dose of three drachms it has produced intoxication. A dose of a table-spoonful caused in a child aged eighteen months, syn)ptoms bearing a strong resemblance to those occasioned by an overdose of opium, although they were not so rapidly manifested. (See case by Mr. Johnson, 'Med. Times,' Oct. 11, 1851, page 380.) In three hours there was complete insensibility, with stertorous breathing, strongly contracted pupils, rapid and weak pulse, coldness of sur- face, paleness of the countenance, general relaxation of the muscles, and occasional convulsive movements. In no instance yet recorded has this oil caused death. A case of recovery in an infant that had swallowed four ounces is described in another Avork (' On Poisons'). A case in which this liquid was criminally administered to an infant, was the subject of a trial at the Central Criminal Court, December 1856, Reg. v. Rodanhosh) : it did not destroy life, but the child suffered for some time from the effects. The defence was, that the oil of turpentine was poured down the child's throat by the mother with a view to cure it of a cough ! She was acquitted. Oil of Tar. This is a powerful vegetable iiTitant. In 1832, about ten drachms of it caused the death of a gentleman, to whom it had been sent by mistake for a black draught. The druggist who sent it was tried for manslaughter, but acquitted. Its irritant properties are owing to creasote, carbolic acid, and other compounds.


[334/1290 b21964944_0334.jp2]

VEGETABLE IRRITANTS. 270 Mouldy Bread. There is a common article of food, namely bread, upon the occasionally noxious effects of which some observations have been made by toxicologists. (In the 'Annales d'llygiene, 1843, pp. 35 and 347, will be found communi- cations on this subject from MM. Guerard, Chevailier, and Gaultier de Claubry ; also in the same journal, 1852, vol. 1, p. 350.) The changes which take place in the decomposition of flour and bread, and the production of various kinds of mouldiness, are here investigated, together Avith the effects of such bread upon the animal system. It would appear that in some parts of France the peasantry manifest no repugnance to the eating of moiddy bread; and that in many instances the practice appears to be attended with no ill effects. The nature of the mould produced, however, is subject to great variation, and it is not improbable, as M. Chevailier suggests, that in some cases a poisonous principle is actually developed. In two instances of children, Avho had partaken of mouldy rye bread, symptoms resembling those of irritant poisoning supervened. The countenance was red and swollen ; the tongue dry; the pulse quick; there were violent colics, with pain in the head, and intense thirst. Vomiting and purging supervened Avith a state of collapse, but the children eventually recovered. These symptoms Avere ascribed to the production of ' mucor mucedo ' in the bread. In 1829, alarming effects having followed from the use of a certain kind of bread in Paris, M. Barruel Avas called upon to determine whether any irritant poison had or had not become accidentally intermixed Avith it. The bread Avas simply in a mouldy state; there was no trace of poison. It is unnecessary to enter further into this subject; the fiicts adduced, together with experiments performed on animals, shoAV that bread, in a state of mouldiness or decay, may not only produce symptoms of poisoning, but actually cause death ; and as it is impossible to distinguish the noxious from the innoxious kind of mould, the use of all bread in such a condition should be avoided. Even fresh bread may occasionally seriou§ly affect the body. The brown bread of London has been known to produce giddiness, lethargy, and other unpleasant symptoms, indicative of an affection of the brain and nervous system. This has been ascribed, with some probability, to the accidental presence of Darnel seeds in the corn. Carob or Locust Bean. The locust beans or locust nvts have been much tised in England for the fattening of cattle ; but in a fcAV cases in Avhich they have been eaten by children, they are supposed to have occasioned violent irritation; and in one case (March, 1857), a boy, est. 10, died in about sixteen hours, appa- rently from their poisonous action on the body. The chief symptoms during life Avcre pain in the head, vomiting, and purging, Avith clenching of the hands, and a spasmodic action of the muscles of the face. On inspection, the stomach and intestines Avere found much inflamed. The viscera Avere care- fully examined by Mr. Watson, of Bolton, but no mineral poison could be de- tected. Another fatal case, as it Avas alleged, from eating locust nuts, occurred subsequently in London, and Avas the subject of an inquest before Mr. Wakley. The facts at present scarcely admit of an explanation. (See 'Med. Times and Gaz.,' March U, 1857.) The nuts contain no substance injurious to animals, and as it is alleged that many human beings have eaten them Avith impunity, the effects produced in the above cases, may have been dependent on idiosyncrasy, (p. 135.)


[335/1290 b21964944_0335.jp2]

271 POISONING BY CANTIIARIDES. ANIMAL IRRITANTS. CHAPTER 23. animal irritants cantharides or spanish flies—symptoms and effects analysis poisonous animal food fish mussels—cheese—sausages diseased flesh of animals trichiniasis. Cantharides. (Spanish Flies.) Symptoms and Effects.—Cantharides are not unfrequently administered, either in the state of powder or tincture, for the criminal purpose of procuring abor- tion. When taken in powder., in the dose of one or two drachms, it gives rise to the following symptoms: a burning sensation in the throat, Avith great diffi- culty of swallowing, violent pain in the abdomen, with nausea, and vomiting of bloody mucus: there is also great thirst and dryness of the fauces, and in a few cases observed by Mr. Maxwell, salivation was a prominent symptom. As the case proceeds, a heavy dull pain is commonly experienced in the loins, and there is an incessant desire to void urine, but only a small quantity of blood or bloody urine is passed at each effort. The abdominal pain becomes of a violent griping kind. Purging supervenes, but this is not always observed : the matters discharged from the bowels are mixed with blood and mucus, and there is often tenesmus (straining). In these, as well as in the vomited liquids, shining green or copper-coloured particles may be commonly seen on examina- tion, Avhereby the nature of the poison taken, if it has been taken in powder, will be at once indicated. After a time, there is severe priapism, and the genital organs are swollen and inflamed both in the male and female. In one instance, observed by Di-. Pereira, abortion was induced, probably owing to excitement of the uterus, from the severe affection of the bladder : for there is no proof that this substance acts directly on the uterus to induce abortion. "With respect to the aphi-odisiac propensities said to be caused by cantharides, these can seldom be excited in either sex, except when the substance is ad- ministered in a dose which would seriously endanger life. When the case proves fatal, death is usually preceded by faintness, giddiness, and convulsions. The tincture of cantharides produces similar symptoms : —they arc, however, more speedily induced, and the burning sensation and constriction of the throat and stomach are more strongly marked : this symptom is often so severe as to render it impossible for the individual to swallow ; and the act of swallowing gives rise to excruciating pain in tlie throat and abdomen. This poison has been in some cases wantonly used, and with great danger to life, with a view of exciting sexual feelings in females. The doses in which it has been given have been such as to cause symptoms of irritant poisoning. In Nov. 1859, six female servants in a gentleman's family, as well as the master and mistress, were attacked with all the symptoms of poisoning by cantharides. It appeared tM the coachman of the family had, shortly before the occurrence, purchased an ounce of this poison ; that he liad put the cantharides into beer and coffee, and had thus poisoned the whole household. He was tried, but acquitted of any indictable offence, on the ground that his intent was not to murder. It was this case which led to an alteration in the law. Appearances.—In one well-marked case of poisoning by this substance, the whole of the alimentary canal, from the mouth downwards, was in a state of inflammation. The mouth and tongue seemed to be deprived of tlieir mucous membrane. The ureters, kidneys, and internal organs of generation were also inflamed. In another instance, in which an ounce of the tincture was swallowed, and death did not occur for fourteen days, the mucous membrane of the stomach was not inflamed ; but it was pulpy, and easily detached. The


[336/1290 b21964944_0336.jp2]

POISOXING BY CAXTHARIDES. 272 kidneys were, however, inflamed. The brain has been found congested, and ulceration of the bladder is said to have been met with. There are few fatal cases reported, in which the appearances have been accurately noted ; indeed, the greater number of those who have taken this poison have recovered. In a case which occurred to Mr. Saunders, death took place in about twenty-four hours. The deceased must have taken the greater part of half an ounce of can- tharides in powder. The symptoms were such as have been above described. On inspection, the vessels of the brain were filled with dark-coloured blood, and the ventricles were distended Avith serum. Both lungs were higlily en- gorged with dark-coloured blood. The gullet was partially inflamed, and there were patches of inflammation on the mucous coat of the stomach, Avhich had become detached in several places. The same inflammatory appearance existed in the small intestines, in the folds of which the powder of cantharides Avas abundantly present. The vessels were distended, and the liver was engorged Avith dark blood. The gall-bladder Avas much distended Avith bile, and none of this secretion appeared to have passed into the boAvels. The spleen and kidneys Avere highly congested ; the ureters were inflamed ; the bladder Avas contracted and empty, and its internal surfiice pale. The glittering of the particles of cantharides in the Adscera during the inspection by candlelight, was very remarkable. ('Medical Times,' Feb. 3,1849, p. 287.) Cantharides have no local action of a chemical nature. The poison is a pure irritant, and the effects obserA^ed on the stomach are entirely due to irritation and inflammation. The quantity of this poison required to produce serious symptoms, or to destroy life, has been a frequent subject of medico-legal inquiry. Dr. Thomson represents the medicinal dose of the poAvder to be from one to three grains. On a late criminal investigation a medical Avitness stated, that one grain Avas the maximum dose, but this is an under-statement: ac- cording to Thomson it is thi'ee grains. The dose of the tincture is from ten minims gradually increased to one flixid-drachm,—of the poAvder from one to two grains. (Pereira, ' Mat. Med.' part 2, vol. 2, p. 754.) Doses aboA'e this, Avhether of the powder or the tincture, are likely to be injurious, and to give rise to symptoms of poisoning. On a trial Avhich took place at Aberdeen, in 1825, it appeared that a drachm of the powder had been ad- ministered : severe symptoms followed, but the person recovered. Dr. Dyce, the medical witness, said he had given ten grains of the poAvder as a medicinal dose. In three cases, observed by Mr. Maxwell, a drachm of the poAvder mixed Avith six ounces of rum was taken by each person : they Avere robust, healthy negroes, they suffered severely, but recovered in about ten days : in these cases, irritation of the urinary organs did not appear until after the men . had been bled. Fatal Dose.—The smallest quantity of the powder which has been knoAvn to destroy life, was in the case of a young female, quoted by Orfila,—the quantity taken was estimated at trventij-fonr grains in tAvo doses. She died in four days ; but as abortion preceded death, this may have been concerned in accelerating that event. Her intellect Avas clear until the last. In one instance a man recovered afler having taken tAventy grains of the powder f' Ed. Med. and Surg. Journal.' Oct. 1844); and in another, after having taken tivo drachms (' Med. Gaz.' vol. 42, p. 873.) An ounce of this tincture has been knoAvn to destroy life. It Avas taken by a boy, a;t. 17, and' he died in fourteen days. This, I believe, is the smallest dose of the tincture Avhich has proved fatal. Four drachms and even six drachms have been taken ;: and although the usual symptoms followed, the parties recovered. The lastt case Avas the subject of a trial at the Central Criminal Court, in September,-. 1836. Six drachms of the tincture Avere administered to a girl, set. 17 : the medical Avitness Avas required to say Avhether half an ounce Avas- suflScient to kill a person, as also what proportion of cantharides was contained


[337/1290 b21964944_0337.jp2]

273 CANTIIAKIDES. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. in an ounce of the tincture ; he said, five grains. One ounce of the tincture is equivalent to five and a lialf grains of the powder ; but considering that the principle canthai-idine is the substance cm which the poisonous properties depend, it is not unlikely that the tincture varies in strength. A case is quoted by Pereira, firom Dr. Hosack (' ]\Iat. Med.' vol. 2, pt. 2, p, 750), in which it is said six ounces of the tincture Avere taken by a man Avithout causing dangerous symptoms ! This must have been an extraordinarily weak preparation : and probably the insects from which the tincture was made, contained little or no cantharidine. The same writer mentions a case within liis own knowledge in which one oimce of the tincture caused serious symptoms. The powder cannot be so readily administered as the tinctiu-e, since a large portion of it floats for a time on any liquid with which it is mixed, and attracts attention by its peculiar appearance. At the Liverpool Lent Assizes, 18G1 {Reg. v. Wilkins^ a man was indicted for administering powdered cantharides to a female. The prisoner had mixed it with a cup of tea: the prosecutrix took a portion of the tea and sufFt?red from vomiting and other symptoms produced by this substance : she skimmed a quantity of the powder from the tea, on which it floated, and its nature was then easily determined. The prisoner w^as convicted of the act of administration, but a serious question arose in reference to the intent. The jury found that he had administered the powder with the intent to excite the sexual passion of the ■woman, for which the new statute had not provided, as this makes the offence to depend only on the intent to injure, aggrieve, or annoy ! Chemical Analysis.—For the detection of cantharidine which forms only 1-250th part of the flies, it has been recommended to digest the suspected solid or the liquid contents of the stomach (evaporated to an extract) in succes- sive quantities of ether, to concentrate these ethereal solutions by sloAv evapora- tion, and then observe whether the concentrated liquid applied to the skin of the lips produces vesication or not: the medical jurist being expected in such cases to make himself the subject of experiment. By this method Barruel discovered cantharides in some chocolate. ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1835, vol, 1, p. 455.) For the detection of the powder, M. Poumet reconuuends that the suspected liquids, mixed with alcohol, should be spread on sheets of glass, and allowed to evaporate spontaneously to dryness. The shining scales will then be seen, on examining, by reflected light, either one or both surfaces of the glass, (' Ann. d'Hyg.' Oct. 1842.) As the powder is insoluble in water, some portion of it may be obtained by washing and decantation. The sedi- ment may be examined on a glass-slide with the microscope. _ Cantharidine is a neutral crystallizable principle. I subjoin illustrations of its crystalline form, obtained by the spontaneous evaporation of its solutions in ether and chloroform :— Crystals of Cantharidine from a solution in Crystals of Cantliariflino from a solution iu chloroform magnified thirty diameters, ether magnified thirty diameters. T


[338/1290 b21964944_0338.jp2]

SEPARATION OF CANTHARIDINE. 274 As ten grains of the powder contain only the l-25th part of a grain, it will not be in the power of an analyst to extract cantharidine unless the powder is present in comparatively large quantity. The 1-100th of a grain of cantharidine dissolved in ether is said to possess vesicating properties. Mr. Tichborne recommends, in place of ether, the use of chloroform for the separation of cantharidine from the tincture or from an alcoholic or aqueous extract of the contents of the stomach. He added a quantity of tincture equivalent to three grains of powdered flies (four drachms) to half a pint of wine: one ounce of chloroform was frequently shaken with this mixture and lefl in contact with it twenty-four hours. The chloroform was then separated by a funnel and filtered; it was allowed to evajaorate spon- taneously in a watch-glass. A pellet of lint of the size of half a pea, pulled out, was. moistened with a drop of olive-oil, and the residue in the watch- glass was taken up by it. It was placed upon the arm and covered with goldl:)eaters' skin. When taken off in three or four hours, the skin was very red, and, on wiping it with chloroform, a large vesicle was produced. (' Chem. News,' Feb. 14, 1863, p. 78.) The quantity of cantharidine here de- tected, amounted to only the l-80th part of a grain. This mode of operating is certainly preferable to the use of ether, as cantharidine is less soluble in ether than in chloroform. I have ascertained by experiment that half an ounce of the tincture of cantharides, Avill yield to chloroform a crystallizable principle, having the characters assigned to cantharidine. In practice it will be found advisable to concentrate the liquid as much as possible before adding the choloroform, and to employ two measures of chloroform for one measure of the liquid for analysis. The evidence of the presence of cantharides, or of their having been taken, is necessary to support a criminal charge; for however unambiguous the symptoms produced by this poison may appear to be in its peculiar effects on the generative and urinary apparatus, the medical jurist should be aware that similar symptoms may proceed from disease. An important case of this kind has been reported by Dr. Hastings. ('Med. Gaz.' vol. 12, p. 431.) A young lady Avas suddenly seized with vomiting, thirst, pain in the loins, strangury, and considerable discharge of blood from the urethra: the generative organs were swollen and painful. She died in four days. She Avas governess in a family, and there was some suspicion that she had been poisoned by cantharides. The stomach and the kidneys were found inflamed, and the bladder also ; this contained about two ounces of blood. There was no trace of poison ; and indeed, it was pretty certain, from the general evidence, that none could have been taken. Noxious Animal Food. Certain kinds of animal food are found to produce, occasionally, symptoms i resembling those of irritant poisoning. In some instances this poisonous effect appears to be due to idiosyncrasy ; for only one person out of several may be • affected. These cases are of importance to the medical jurist, since they "may give rise to unfounded charges of criminal poisoning. In the absence of any demonstrable poison, we must test the question of idiosyncrasy by observing Avhether more than one person is affected, and whether the same kind of food given to animals, produces symptoms of poisoning. If, with this latter con- dition, several persons are affected simultaneously, we cannot refer the effects- to idiosyncrasy; they are most probably due to the jn-esence of an animal! poison. Among the articles of food which have caused symptoms of irritant- poisoning, may be mentioned,— Poisonous Fish. Ahissels.—Of a\l the varieties of shell-fish, none have so frequently given rise to accidents as the common mussel. The symptoms


[339/1290 b21964944_0339.jp2]

NOXIOUS ANIMAL FOOD. SHELL-FISH. 275 which it produces, are uneasiness and sense of weight in the stomach, sensa- tion of numbness in the exti-emities; heat, dryness, and constriction in the mouth and throat; thirst, shivering, difficulty of breathing, cramps in the legs, SAvelling and inflammation of the eyelids, Avith a profuse secretion of tears, and heat and itching of the skin, followed by an eruption resembling nettle- rash. These symptoms are sometimes accompanied by colic, vomiting, and purging. They may occur within ten minutes or a quarter of an hour ; but their appearance has been delayed for twenty-four hours. There is generally great exhaustion and debility. These symptoms have proceeded from the eating of not more than ten or twelve miissels. Two cases, reported by Dr. Christison, proved fatal, the one in three, and the other in about seven hours. In general, however, especially when there is free vomiting, the patients recover. In the inspection of the two fatal cases above mentioned, no appear- ance was found to .account for death. A case in which two mussels produced, in a boy aged ten, alarming symptoms, followed by an eruption resembling scarlatina and nettle-rash, will be found elsewhere reported (' Guy's Hosp. Reports,' Oct. 1850, p. 213). In July, 18G0, a number of persons living at Tralee were poisoned under the following circumstances. A woman picked up some mussels which she found at the bottom of the basin of a ship-canal. She distributed them among her neighbours, and during the night, twenty-one persons who had eaten them, were attacked Avith symptoms of poisoning. Three children died, and six individuals were placed in imminent peril. The rest were soon out of danger. Eight of the twenty-one persons attacked were adults. (' Med. Times and Gazette,' July 28, 1860.) In October, 1862, an accident occurred at Liverpool in which a woman died in about four hours, alter having eaten some mussels taken from a ship in the docks. There was severe pain and vomiting among the symptoms, which generally resembled those of arsenical poisoning. Several other persons were made seriously ill, but recovered. Although the vessel was not sheathed with copper or yellow metal, it was coated with a green pigment, of which arsenic may have been a constituent. The poisonous action of mussels can be referred neither to putrefaction nor disease; nor in all cases to idiosyncrasy, since in one instance those mussels only which had been taken from a particular spot were poisonous; all persons who partook of them suffered, and a dog to which some of them were given, was killed. From a case which occurred to M. Bouchardat, it would appear that copper is sometimes present, and may be the cause of the poisonous effects. Two women were poisoned by mussels, and he found on analysis sufficient copper in the fish to account for the symptoms of irritation from which they suffered. ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1837, vol. 1, p. 358.) Copper is not, however, present in all cases, and it is therefore probable that there is in some, if not in all instances, an antnial poison present in the fish. (See 'Ann. d'Hyg.' 1851, vol. 1, p. 387, vol. 2, p. 108.) Oysters and periwinkles have- occasionally given rise to similar symptoms. Salmon, sold in the state of pickled salmon, or even herrings salted, may also act as irritants: this may be due to the fish being partially decayed before it is used, or to the noxious effects of the pickle. For some remarks by Dr. Hamilton on the poisonous properties offish, see the Pharmaceutical Journal, Jan. 1853, p. 344. Cheese.—lha symptoms produced by cheese have been those of irritant poisoning. The nature of the poison is unknown. In some cases the irritant property'is undoubtedly due to a putrefied state of the curd, or to the pro- duction of an irritant oil. Again, it has been supposed that the poison is occasionally derived from certain vegetables on which the cows feed. In 1858 a case was referred to me for examination, in which twenty-five persons had suffered from vomiting and purging more or less violent, owing to theii?


[340/1290 b21964944_0340.jp2]

276 NOXIOUS ANIMAL FOOD. SAUSAGE POISON. rere- having partaken of cheese. The only articles of food taken in common av bread, beer, and cheese. The bread and beer were excluded from any suspicion of containing poison. All the persons recovered. On a close ex- amination of the cheese I found it to be strongly acid : it had an offensive musty smell, and yielded a quantity of acrid oil to ether. It had not been properly pressed, and the casein had undergone a chemical change. The ashes yielded copper and lead in traces. The cheese had acquired irritant ]>roperties, not from the presence of any poisonous matter added to it, but from partial decay. Tliere was abundant evidence that cheese from the same dairy had been eaten without causing any injurious symfjtoms. This nega- tive evidence, however, is quite consistent with one cheese acquiring noxious properties. We must not lose sight of the fact that cheese may actually con- tain poison mixed with it through ignorance. Orpiment or chromate of lead may be used as colouring, and the discovery of such mineral substances would at once account for the irritant effects. (See Pharmaceutical Journal, Aug. 18G2, p. 89.) The milk and cheese of some of the North American provinces, is said to be occasionally rendered poisonous by the fact that cows pasture at certain seasons on vegetables of a noxious kind. Sausa(je Poison.—The symptoms caused by sausage-poison partake of a narcotico-irritant character : they are very slow in appearing,—sometimes two, three, or four days may elapse before they manifest themselves. This poison is of a formidable kind : its effects have been chiefly observed in Germany., In the Medical Gazette for Nov. 1842, there is an account of the cases of three persons, who had died from the effects of liver-sausages, which had been made from an apparently healthy pig, slaughtered only a Aveek before. The inspection threw no light on the cause of death. The poisonous pro])erty was supjwsed to depend on a partial decomposition of the fatty parts of the sausag&s. It is said, that when extremely putrefied, they are not poisonous. In a case in which I was consulted, a few slices of a German sausage, evidently of old manufacture, but not putrescent, caused the deatli of a child, Avith violent symptoms of irritation of the stomach and boAvels, I examined a portion of the sausage : it contained no poisonous matter Avhich admitted of detection. The fatty portions Avere rancid, and the lean porticms very dry. There Avas no doubt, hoAvever, that it had been the cause of the symptoms and death of the child. Dr. Tripe has published a complete account of the effects produced by sausage poison (' Brit, and For. Med. llev' Jan. 18G0, page 197). It ai)pears that in November 1859, sausages made and sold by a pork-butcher, at Kingsland, Avere eaten more or less by sixty- six persons, of Avhom sixty-four Avere attacked Avith violent symptoms in from three and a half to thirty-six hours subsequently to the meal. One case only proved fatal, on the seventh day. No symptoms ap])eared in this man until after the lapse of six hours. It seems that he had eaten one of the sausag(!S raAv and three cooked. He was attacked Avith severe vomiting, and purging folloAved by shivering: there Avas pain in the abdomen : violent headache and great prostration. The pulse Avas feeble and quick, and there Avas del ii'ium. These symptoms underAvent a remission, but he had a relapse, became comatose, and died on the seventh day. Latterly, he chiefly com- plained of pain in tlie boAvels. Dr. Letheby found, on inspection, no sicns of inflammation or of the action of an irritant in the stomach. The small intes- tines Avere much inflamed at the loAver end, and the gall-bladder Avas distended. The other organs Avere healthy. The viscera contained no A-eo-e- table or mineral poison. The sausages were made Aviih heifer-beef, pork-?at sage, and pepper. There Avas no evidence of anything noxious about them|. and a chemical analysis yielded nothing of a poisonous nature. There could''. however, bo no doubt that the sausages had caused the symptoms and death:''


[341/1290 b21964944_0341.jp2]

NOXIOUS ANIMAL FOOD. DISEASED rORK. 277 the food in this case acting as a narcotico-irritant poison. Other persons suffered from burning in the throat and stomach, followed by vomiting and purging; then giddiness or confusion in the head, and in some there was dehrium. In the man who died, the delirium was well marked, and the eyes Avere red. In those persons who recovered, the noxious animal matter was probably early thrown off by vomiting and purging. (See ' Trichiniasis,' p. 278.) Pork. Bacon.—These conunon articles of food occasionally give rise to symptoms so closely resambling those of irritant poisoning, as to be easily mistaken for them. In some cases, the effect appears to be due to idiosyn- crasy ; but in others it can be explained only by supposing the food to have a directly poisonous action. The noxious effects of pork have been particularly shown by the cases published by the late Dr. Mac-Divitt. (' Ed. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' Oct. 1836.) As pork is sometimes salted in leaden vessels, lead may be Ibund in it: but fresh pork has been observed to have a noxious action. In January, 18G4, Mr. Kesteven met with a case in which all the members of a famUy were attacked with symptoms of ii-ritant poisoning, after eating a leg of pork. The principal symptoms were nausea, vomiting, griping pains in the abdomen, and purging: but dogs and cats fed upon the meat did not appear to suffer. Other portions of the animal from which the leg was taken, were eaten by other families, and no symptoms of poisoning were produced. I examined the fatty portion of the food without discovering any trace of the ordinary poisons. The effects could, therefore, only be referred to some change in this particular joint. These cases of j)oisoning by animal food have of late been very fully ex- amined by Mr. Simon and Mr. Gamgee. The^e gentlemen have traced the injurious efforts of pork to a diseased condition of the pig, oAving to the animal having been fed on improper food. The term measly pork is now very well known to consist in a diseased condition of the flesh of the animal, in Avhich it is filled Avith a parasite called cysticercus, Avhich is believed to be the larva of the tapeAvorm. This parasite undergoes full development when in the shape of food it reaches the human intestines. Mr. Gamgee expresses his confidence that there are between 40,000 and 50,000 measly pigs in Ireland, most of Avhich are sent to Great Britain for consumption ; and his impression is that for every measly pig in the kingdom, there is at least one human being affected Avith tapcAvorm. These parasites may not directly kill a person Avho eats this noxious food, but they favour the development of fatal disease. He also remarks that a microscopical thread-Avorm, the trichina spiralis, brings the muscular flesh of swine into a state in which a small quantity of it eaten raAV, or in an imperfectly cooked state, may suffice to desti-oy life. As re- gards the pos.sil)le ill effects from consuming, in a Avell-cooked state, the fiesh of animals afflicted Avith anthrax or carbuncular fever, evidence is still im- perfect, but he believes that human life may be endangered by it. An opinion has been expressed that boils and perhaps other like affections are caused in the human subject by the consumption of diseased meat. According to Mr. Gamgee, at a convict establishment Avhere diseased cattle are eaten in large quantities, and especially cattle afflicted Avith lung-disease, as many as 40 and 50 cases of boils and carbuncles occur in a month among 1,500 convicts. (Simon's 'Annual Report,' 18G3.) This lends support to the theory that diseased animal food is highly faA'-ourable to the production of carbun- cular disease. There is reason to believe that, in spite of every precaution, a large amount of diseased and uuAvholesome meat is sold to the public, and that of the various kinds of flesh used as food none is so subject to disease pork. Some of the changes Avhich it undergoes ai^e of a microsco- pical character, and are not likely to be noticed. This subject has attracted


[342/1290 b21964944_0342.jp2]

NOXIOUS ANIMAL FOOD. DISEASED PORK. 278 the attention, not only of tlie Board of Health in England, but of the Go- vernments of France and the German States, with a view to the protection of public health. For a full account of the diseases aifecting the flesh ol the pig, their mode of production, and the prevention of accidents, I must rder the reader to papers by M. Delpech, in the ' Annales D'Hygiene, 1864, vol. 1, pp. 5, 241 (' De la Ladrerie du pore,' &c.) It has been clearly shown that the parasites found in the flesh of this and other animals, are not easily killed by boiling, roasting, or smoking, and that those are liable to suffer the most, who habitually eat the raw or partly-cooked flesh. The flesh of the pig containing cysticercus, presents in the cooked state the following appear- ances. When boiled it is paler than Avholesome meat: it appears dryer in patches, and the muscular fibres are more separated than usual. When these are opened, the parasites are seen in the interstices, appearing as opaque white spots of the size of a hemp-seed, and presenting much the same aspect as when living. The caudal bladder attached to their bodies disappears when the meat is thoroughly cooked, and the body of the animal then appears isolated in the middle of the muscular tissue. It is friable and breaks down easily under pressure with a crackling sound, owing to the presence of cal- careous matter. In this state it does not appear to be necessarily productive of injury ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 18()4, vol. 1, p. 249), although such food must be regarded as most unwholesome. All the members of a family Avere seized Avith vomiting, purging and syncope after having eaten a dish of pork. A medical man examined the meat, and found it full of cysticercus. A poi'k- butcher was accused of having sold bad meat, but it was proved to have been some cheap pork bought of a hawker of provisions ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1864. vol. 1, p. 24(5.) If the cysticercus did not cause the symptoms in this case, the meat had undergone some change sufficient to impart to it irritant proper- ties. These j^arasites occur in all the fleshy parts of the body. I have seen them in the human heart, as well as in the flesh of animals. My colleague, Mr. Hilton, first showed them to me in the living state, in the muscles of the thigh of a man, in 1834. They are not commonly found in the fatty portions of man and animals, and are less common in sheep and oxen than in pigs. Trichiniasis.—The fatal malady, arising fi-om the introduction of the tri- china spiralis into the human body, has recently attracted much attention in France and Germany; and among others. Dr. Keller, of Darmstadt, has pub- lished some important facts illustrating the symptoms produced, and the mode in which this parasite causes death. Dr. Keller considers that it is a question weU worthy of the attention of medical jurists, whether many cases of death from suspected irritant poisoning, in which no poisonous matter could be detected in the body, may not have been really due to trichina disease. Magnified view of Trichina spiralis in its Capsule. a The worm coiled. b The capsules. >lOTOAL HIE Trichina spiralis in the abdominal muscles of a man : natural size of the capsules containing the worm. The trichina (from dpl^, a hair) spiralis, a flesh-worm, is found chiefly in the course of the fibres of all the striped muscles of the trunk and lii^bs,


[343/1290 b21964944_0343.jp2]

279 TRICIIINIASIS. THE TRICHINA SPIRALIS. most frequently on those of the front of the chest, neck, and abdomen. It has also been found on the muscular fibres of the heart and oesophagus. The parasites appear in the form of very small white ovoid bodies, or capsules, perceptible to the eye as white specks, in the midst of the muscular fibres, but only distinctly seen by the aid of a magnifying glass. The trichina, or worm, is coiled up in the centre of each oval capsule, the greater diameter of which is always parallel to the muscular fibre with which it is closely incorpo- rated. The cngx-aving at the foot of page 278, is taken from a preparation in the Museum of Guy's Hospital; it represents a portion of the abdominal muscles of a man, covered with trichinse in situ, and as nearly as possible of the natural size. Other illustrations in the same page represent three of the capsules b b b magnified, with the trichina coiled up in the centre of one of them. These parasites are frequently so numerous as to give to the red flesh a white speckled appearance. According to Dr. Keller, as many as 300,000 have been counted in half a pound of raw meat: and Dr. Pietra Santa affirms that one gi-amme (about sixteen grains) of diseased meat, may contain 6,000 ti'ichinaj, each having from sixty to eighty embryos. ('Ann. d'Iiyg.''1864,vol. 1, p. 317.) The illustrations below present a magnified view of the capsules of trichina in muscular fibre from a drawing by Dr. Wilks, and an engraving of the flesh-worm itself, removed from its capsule, and magnified 100 diameters. This, Avhich is taken from an engraving in Griffiths' ' Micrographic Dic- tionary,' shows the form and structure of the parasite. The worm is cylindrical, narrowed or pointed towards the anterior, while the posterior end is obtu.se and rounded. Trichina spiralis magni- fied 100 diameters. The actual size of the capsule has been variously stated. From an ex- amination of two sets of specimens in the muscles of the throat and abdomen, I estimated the long diameter to be the l-50th of an inch, and the short diameter 1-100th. The worm itself, is said to be the l-30th of an inch in length. The capsules are remarkably uniform in size. They are built up at the expense of the muscular structure by whicli they are surrounded. The history of this animal has been given by numerous pathologists. (' Ilodgkin's Lectures on Morbid Anatomy,' 1836, vol. 1, p. 211.) A full description of its anatomy and habits by Dr. Bristowe and Mr. Rainey Avill


[344/1290 b21964944_0344.jp2]

280 THE TRICIIIXA SPIRALIS. be found in the ' Transactions of the Pathological Society ' for 1853-4, p. 274. More recent accounts of its influence on health by Dr. Pietra Santa, have been published in the ' Ann. d'llyg.' 1864, vol. 1, p. 305 (' La Trichina spiralis'), and by Drs. Schultze and Llicke in Casper's ' Vierteljahrschritl fur gerichtliche Medicin,' 18G4, No. 1, p. 103, and No. 2, p. 209. Dr. Lucke's paper is of especial interest as its title ' Die Trichinen vor dem Forum' implies, since it points to the medico-legal bearings of the subject, and the possible danger of confounding the ravages of this parasite, with the obscure effects produced in certain forms of chronic irritant poisoning. From these researches, it is now clearly established, that the trichina is a viviparous parasite, which passes the greater part of its existence, in the chrysalis state, in the muscular system, until, by the consumption of this muscle as food, it finds in the stomach and intestines of another warm-blooded animal, a favourable medium for its full development into an intestinal worm, According to Virchow and Zenker, the trichina not only frequently presents itself in the human organism, but this organism is most favourable to its development. The period of incubation of the chrysalis in the stomach and bowels of man or of warm-blooded animals, is from six to eight days ; and during this time it there thrives and propagates to an almost incredible extent. Dr. Keller states that in three or four days the females produce 100 or more young ones, which begin on the sixth day to leave the parent animal; and he estimates that in a few days after the ingestion of half a pound of meat, the stomach and intestinal canal of a person may contain thirty millions of these minute worms. M. Herbst found the muscles of two dogs which had been fed upon parts of a badger containing worms, to be loaded with these parasites. When once introduced into the stomach and intestines, the worms leave their capsules, become free, and produce young, which migrate through the walls of the intestines into the muscles: there they become encysted, and are ultimately found appropriating and destroying the muscular substance to a greater or less extent. The sudden liberation of a large number of these worms causes irritation and inflammation in the bowels, attended by peculiar symptoms resembling in some respects those of poisoning. It is worthy of note that tricliinte are more frequently found in pork and articles of food derived from it, than in any other kind of meat. Measly pork appears to be sometimes of a trichinous chai-acter. Further, the vitality of the parasites is not destroyed unless the meat, or other substances in which they are located, has been subjected to a temperature equal to that of boiling water for a sufficient time to ensure that every particle has been exposed to this degree of heat. Salting and .smoking, or partial cooking, is not sufficient to destroy the worms in all parts of the food, and they have even been found living in putrefied meat. This may serve to account in some cases for the serious symptoms which have followed the use of pork as food, also of bacon, sausages, and German sausages, which are generally made of raw ham. The symptoms produced by the use of such food are, in the first stage, those of intestinal irritation, loss of appetite, sickness, pain, general weakness of the limbs, with diarrhoea, swelling of the eyelids and of the joints, profuse clammy perspiration, and a wasting fever, sometimes of a typhoid character. Death is either the result of paralysis (from destruction of the muscular fibres), or of peritonitis and irritative fever. During the perforation of the coats of the intestines by these worms, the mucous membrane becomes irri- tated and inflamed: pus is formed on its surface, and bloody evacuations are sometimes passed. No case is known in which trichiniasis, after havino- once declared itself, was arrested by medical treatment. ° The noxious effects of this food on liuman beings are well illustrated by a


[345/1290 b21964944_0345.jp2]

EPIDEMIC TRICIIIXIASIS. 281 series of cases which occurred at Hettstiidt, in the Hartz mountains, in 1863. (' British Med. Journal,' Jan. 16, 1864, p. 75.) One hundred and three persons partook of smoked sausiiges made from a pig affected, as it turned out, Avith trichinous disease. The sausages were fried, and served for dinner in the usual way. On the following day, several persons who had partaken of this food were attacked with severe pain in the bowels, purging, loss of appetite, great prostration of strength, and fever. The number of persons attacked, rapidly increased : symptoms of peritonitis and pneumonia manifested them- selves, and these were followed by paralysis of the intercostal muscles, and of the muscles in front of the neck. Eighty-three persons died from the effects of this noxious food, and the remainder were seriously injured in health. The remnants of sausage and of pork not eaten at this festival were examined, and were found to be literally swarming with encysted trichinas. (See Cas- per's ' Vierteljahrschrift,' April 1864, p. 286.) The writer in the above jouraal, affirms that this parasitic di.sease does not attack sheep, oxen, or horses, and that beef is the safest of all descriptions of food, as no parasites have ever been discovered in it. They have not been found in the blood of animals whose muscles are liable to their attacks. Dr. Reyber relates that in the year 1862, a series of cases of illness to the number of thirty occurred in Plauen, as the result of the use of pork containing trichinaj. Among the symptoms were great languor, loss of appe- tite, fever and pains in the muscles of the arms and legs. The effects spread like an epidemic. A female patient vmder Professor Virchow, died, at Dresden, with typhoid and rheumatic symptoms. When the body was inspected, trichinte were found in her muscles. On inquiry, it was found that, four weeks before, a diseased pig had been killed and eaten in the town in which she resided; the butcher that killed it suffered, but this woman alone died from the effects. ('Ann. d'Hyg.'Oct. 1863, p. 471.) Pietra Santa relates that, at a nuptial festival at Wiesbaden, twenty persons partook of the food placed on the table. In the evening, the bride w^as suddenly seized with symptoms of poisoning, and in spite of medical assistance, died in a few hours. The bridegroom himself suffered from similar symptoms, and died after two days' illness. The other guests were not seriously affected. A physician-expert, who examined the case, found trichiniE in the body of the deceased, as well as in certain articles of food prepared from pork, which had been served at the table (' Ann. d'Hyg.' April 1, 1864, p. 321.) The fact that only two out of the party, suffered from symptoms resembling poisoning, and that one died rapidly, Avas calculated to excite grave suspicion. Sudden deaths from trichinous food are not common, and it is to be regretted that this case is not given with fuller details. The real cause of death in this instance, does not appear to have been clearly traced to the trichinous food. Although little has been heard of trichinous disease in England, it appears to have been prevalent in Germany. Among the official notices recently published by the Prussian Government, is one which points out the danger arising from the use of pork in a diseased state, and warning those who sell it to the public, of the penalties Avhich they thereby incur. (Casper's ' Vier- teljahrschrift,' July 1863, p. 177.) Under this notice, it is stated in addi- tion to the cases above given, that in 1862, thirty-eight persons in Kalbe, suffered severely from the use of such food, and of these, eight died from the effects. Dr. Schultze refers to other groups of cases, which, however, do not appear to have been attended with great fatality. In Magdeburg, Neustadt, and Buckau, over a period of five years, 1858-62, from three to four hundred cases of illness were traceable to this cause. (' Die Trichineu Krankheit,'


[346/1290 b21964944_0346.jp2]

NOXIOUS EFFECTS OF PUTRESCEXT FOOD. 282 Casper's ' Yierteljahrsch.; April 1804, p. 278.) In Burg more than fifty ])ersons suffered, and eleven died. Other fatal cases have been reported. For tliese I must refer the reader to Dr. Schultze's paper. In February 1864, H whole family was poisoned at New York, and one member died from eating ])art of a ham, which, on microscopic examination, was found to be full of the trichina spiralis. Death was referred by the medical attendant to this cause. It is probable that some unexplained cases of death from irritation of the stomach and bowels, simulating chronic irritant poisoning, may have been the result of eating food containing trichina spiralis. Medical men have been unable to group the symptoms under any known form of disease, Avhile the inarks of irritation and'inilammation in the mucous membrane of the bowels have given strength to the supposition that poison must have been taken by the deceased, although chemical analysis had failed to show the presence of any ordinary poison in the fluids and solids of the body. In the course of many 3'ears' practice, I have met with several cases of this description, and there has been sometimes manifested a disposition to doubt the accuracy of chemical analysis. Dr. Lticke has related a series of fatal cases which occurred in 1845, attributed at the time to poison, which as he suggests were most probably caused by the use of tricliinous food. (Casper's ' Vierteljahrschrift,' January 1864, p. 102.) As means of distinction from irritant poisoning may be pointed out the long time which commonly elapses between the taking of the food and the com- mencement of the symptoms. The pain, vomiting, and purging are compara- tively slight: the pain is in the bowels rather than in the stomach, and peritonitis, pneumonia, and fever are not commonly results of the action of irritant poisons, while they appear to be constant symptoms in trichiniasis. The absence of ordinary poison in the food, in the urine, and the evacita- tions, at any stage, may also be taken as conclusive evidence against irritant poisoning in its usual form. In suspected cases, a new method of research must be added to those already in use. If any of the food can be obtained, this must be examined ibr the parasite by the aid of the microscope. If the case proves fatal, the voluntary muscles of the deceased must undergo a similar examination. Putrescent Food.—The effects of disease on animal food must not be con- founded with those which result from decay or putrefaction. The flesh of the most healthy animal is rendered unfit for food when it has passed into a putrescent state. It is not merely unwholesome, but highly irritant, causing rapidly vomiting, purging, pain, and other symptoms of a severe kind. Forttmately these symptoms lead at once to the expulsion of the noxious food from the body, and the person then recovers : the young, the old, and the infirm may, however, be so prostrated by vomiting and purging, that they may sink from exhaustion. Animal matter in a state of partial decay, or in the transition stage of putrefaction, must be regarded as of a poisonous nature. Much of the cheap butcher's meat sold to the poor is in a state of decay, and is quite unfit for human food. In 1863, 114,000 pounds of diseased, and 76,000 pounds of putrid meat were seized and condemned in the City of London alone. In January 1851, the family of a surgeon near London, were all affected Avith symptoms resembling irritant poisoning, after haviiio- partaken of a hare which had been stewed in a clean earthen vessel. The surgeon informed me that on the second day, his wife Avas seized with vomiting and purging, giddiness, heat in the throat, and general numbness, with infiamed eyes. Other members of the fiimily vomited, and in the course of a few days the symptoms disappeared. I examined the vomited matter, and found it to consist of portions of the hare partially digested, but in a state


[347/1290 b21964944_0347.jp2]

POISONED GAME. 283 of putrefaction, so that there was abundant evidence of sulphuretted hydrogen in the liquid. There was no mineral poison of any kind, although the symptoms, it will be observed, were rather like those occasioned by arsenic. It had been remarked by the family, that a silver spoon, which had been used in serving out this vmwholesonie food, was turned of a brown colour, no doubt from the chemical action of sulphuretted hydrogen; and this may be taken as a good domestic test of the putrefied condition of such food. Nature generally applies an appropriate remedy, in the fact that the food itself pro- duces copious vomiting and purging. Cases of this kind must be distinguished from those in which poisoned game is sold to the public. The game may be quite free from putrefaction, but noxious from the poisoned grain which may have caused death. It is a very common practice to steep grain in a solution of arsenic, previous to sowing, and pheasants, partridges, and other birds may be accidentally destroyed by eating the grain. In some instances, grouse and other game are maliciously destroyed by the laying of corn, saturated Avith arsenic or other poisons, in the localities Avhere the birds abound. There is no law to prevent the sale of poisoned game by poulterers, and there is no precaution which can be taken by the purchasers, except by observing whether the birds have or have not been shot. (See on this subject, ' On Poisons ;' also a letter by Dr. Fullei-, ' Med. Gaz.' vol. 42, p. 1036.) Mr. Taylor, of Romsey, has directed attention (Sept. 1862) to the serious symptoms produced by Canadian partridges eaten as food. A lady Avho had partaken of this food was, in about two hours and a half, attacked with the following symptoms. She had sickness, and became insensible; the skin was cold, and no pulse could be felt. She was in a hopeless state for some hours, and only slowly recovered. The birds were quite fresh, having been packed in ice. In another case, there were similar symptoms with constriction of the throat and great pain. Animals were made ill by this food. It was believed that, in these cases, the birds had not been killed by poison, but that their flesh had been rendered poisonous by some vegetable which they had eaten. NEUKOTIC POISONS. (narcotic or cerebral poisons.) CHAPTER 24. opium symptoms appearances—its action on infants—poisoning by poppies by opiate compounds morphia and its salts—process for detecting opium and its principal constituents in organic mixtures. Opium. Symptoms.—The symptoms which manifest themaclves when a large dose of opium or its tincture has been taken, are in general of a uniform character. They consist in giddiness, drowsiness, a strong tendency to sleep, stupor, suc- ceeded by perfect insensibility, the person lying motionless, with the eyes closed as if in a sound sleep. In this state he may be easily roused by a loud noi.se, and made to answer a question: but he speedily relapses into stupor. In a later stage, when coma has supervened with stertorous breathing, it will


[348/1290 b21964944_0348.jp2]

rOISOXIXG BY OriUM. SYMPTOMS. 284 be difficult, if not impossible, to rouse liim. The pulse is at first small, quick, and irregular, the respiration hurried, and the skin warm and bathed in perspi- ration, sometimes livid: but when the individual becomes comatose, the breath- ing is slow and stertorous; the pulse slow and full. The skin is occasionally cold and pallid. The pupils, in the early stage, are contracted; in the later stage, and when progressing to a fetal termination, they may be found dilated. In a case referred to me in 184G, one pupil was contracted and the other dilated. They are commonly insensible to light. The expression of the countenance is placid, pale, and ghastly : the eyes are heavy, and the lips are livid. Some- times there is vomiting, or even purging; and, if vomiting takes place freely before stupor sets in, there is great hope of recovery. This symptom is chiefly observed when a large dose ol' opium has been taken; and it may then be, perhaps, ascribed to the mechanical effect of the poison on the stomach. The odour of opium is occasionally perceptible in the breath. Nausea and vomit- ing, with headache, loss of appetite and lassitude, often follow on recovery. In cases likely to prove fatal, the muscles of the limbs feel flabby and relaxed, the lower jaw drops, the pulse is feeble and imperceptible, the sphincters are in a state of relaxation, the pupils are unaffected by light, the temperature of the body is low, there is a loud mucous rattle in breathing, and convulsions are sometimes observed before death, but more commonly in children than in adults. One of the marked effects of this poison is to suspend all the secretions except that of the skin. Even during the lethargic state, the skin, although cold, is often copiously bathed in perspiration. It is a question yet to be determined, whether this may not be a medium by which the poison is principally elimi- nated. The contracted state of the pupils has been hitherto considered to furnish a valuable distinctive sign of poisoning by opium or the salts of morphia. In relying upon it, it is necessary to bear in mind the fact pointed out by Dr. Wilks, that, in apoplexy which is seated in the Pons Varolii, the pupils are also contracted. He describes two cases of this form of apoplexy which were mistaken for poisoning by opium in consequence of this state of the pupils. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1863, 1, p. 214.) These symptoms usually commence in from half an liour to an honr after the poison has been swallowed. Sometimes they come on in a few minutes, especially in children; and at other times their appearance is protracted for a long period. In a case reported by Dr. Skae, the person was found totally in- sensible in fifteen mimites. As Ave might expect, from the facts connected with the absorption of poisons, when the drug is taken in the solid state, the symp- toms are commonly more slow in appearing, than when it is dissolved in water or alcohol. In a case which occurred at Liverpool, in August, 1803, com- municated to me by Dr. Edwards, a lady took on an empty stomach, a large dose (supposed to have been one ounce and a half) of laudanum. No symp- toms of narcotic poisoning appeared for four hours and a half, and life was protracted for twenty-two hours. It has been frequently observed, on these occasions, that a person has recovered from the first symptoms, and has then had a relapse, and died. There is some medico-legal interest connected with this state, which has been called secondary asphyxia from opium, although there appears to be no good reason for giving to it this name. In December, 1843, a gentleman swallowed a quantity of laudanum, and was found labouring under the usual symptoms. The greater part of the poison was removed fi-om the stomach by the pump, and he so far recovered from his insensibility as to be able to enter into conversation with his medical attendants; but a relapse took place, and he died the following night. The case of the Hon. Mrs. Anson (Jan. 1859), furnishes another illustration of this singular condition. This lady swallowed' while fasting, an ounce and a half of laudanum by mistake. In a quarter of


[349/1290 b21964944_0349.jp2]

285 AITKARANCES IN THE DEAD BODY. an liour emetics were given, but she did not vomit for half an hour; and she was not treated medically for two hours and a half The matter then drawn from the stomach had no smell of laudanum. She was quite unconscious, and had lost the power of swallowing. Alter remaining in this comatose state for upwards of nine hours, the patient i-evived, the face became natural, the pulse steady, the power of swallowing returned, she was able to recognize her daugh- ters, and, although, in a thick voice, to give an account of the mistake she liad made. This state lasted about five minutes, the torpor then returned, she again sank into profound coma, and died fourteen hours after the poison had been taken. It is not improbable that, in these cases, death may be occasioned by the accinniilation of the poison, carried by the absorbents into the system ; i. e. the morphia may be more rapidly carried into the system than it is eliminated from it. A remarkable case illustrative of this remittent form of poisoning by opium has been published by Mr. Kirby. (' Dubl. Med. Press,' Dec. 24, 1845, p. 40G.) Appearances.—In a case which proved fatal in fifteen hours, the vessels of tlie head were found unusually congested throughout. On the surface of the fore part of the lelt hemisphere, there was an ecchymosis, apparently pro- duced by the effusion of a few drops of blood. There were numerous bloody points on the cut surface of the brain :—there Avas no serum collected in the ventricles. The stomach was quite healthy. Fluidity of the blood is men- tioned as a common appearance in cases of poisoning by opium. There is also engorgement of the lungs: most frequently observed, according to Dr. Christison, in those cases which have been preceded by convulsions. (Op. cit. p. 732.) Among the external appearances there is often great lividity of the skin. Extravasjition of blood on the brain is rarely seen;—serous effusions in the ventricles, or between the membranes, are sometimes met with. The stomach is so seldom found otherwise than in a healthy state, that the inflam- matory redness said to have been occasionally seen, may have been due to accidental causes. When tincture of opium has been taken and retained on the stomach, increased redness of the mucous membrane may occasionally be produced by the alcohol alone. In a case of poisoning by a large dose of tincture of opium, Dr. Sharkey found the following appearances tAvelve hours after death:—the body warm and rigid; the stomach healthy, containing a quantity of gruel-like fluid, without any smell of opium. The intestinal canal and all the other viscera were healthy. The veins of the scalp, as well as ol' the dura mater and sinuses, were gorged with blood; but there was no effusion in any part of the brain. The contents of the stomach yielded no trace of morphia or meconic acid, but there was no doubt that death had been caused by opium, taken on the previous night. (' Med. Gaz.,' vol 37, p. 235.) A case was communicated to me by Dr. Ogston, which was the subject of a trial at the Aberdeen Autumn Circuit, in Sept. 1853, in which a child, aged six months, died in a few hours from a dose of sixty drops of wine of opium. The brain Avas congested to a marked extent. Although the dose was comparatively large, and death rapid, there Avas no decided indication of the presence of opium in the stomach. From this account of the appearances in the dead body, it will be seen that there is nothing but a fulness of the vessels of the brain, which can be looked upon as specially indicative of poisoning by opium, and even this is not ahvays present. A congested condition of the brain, hoAvever, if it exist, can furnish no evidence of poisoning when taken alone, since it is so frequently found, as a result of morbid causes, in otherAvise healthy siibjects. Quantity required to destro}} Life.— Ihe medicinal dof^c of opium, in extract or powder, for a healthy adult, varies from half a grain to two grains. Five grains Avould be a very full dose. The medicinal dose of the tincture is from ten minims to one drachm,—as an average, from thirty to forty minims. The


[350/1290 b21964944_0350.jp2]

28G OPIUM. FATAL DOSE. ACTION OX INFANTS. smallest dose of solid opium wliich has been known to prove fatal to an adult, Avas in a case reported by Dr. Sharkey, of Jersey. A man, set. 32, died very speedily in a convulsive fit, after having taken two pills, each containing about one grain and a quarter of extract of opium. This quantity is equivalent to fom- grains of crude opium. (' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 37, p. 236.) The smallest 'fatal dose of the tincture in an adult, which I have found recorded, is tivo \lrachms. the case is reported by Dr. Skae. (' Ed. Med. and Surg. Journ.,' July, 1840.) The patient was a robust man, aged 56 ;—he swallowed the tincture at ten in the evening, and died under the usual symptoms on the following morning; the case having lasted only twelve hours. The quantity actually swallowed, however, appears to be involved in some doubt; for it is subsequently stated (p. 160) that half an ounce of laudanum may have been taken. Large doses of the tincture have frequently been taken without proving fatal. I have elsewhere recorded a case in which five ounces of laudanum were taken even without producing sleep, and the patient recovered. (' Guy's Hosp. Reports, Oct. 1850, p. 220.) Action of Opium on Infants.—In connection with this subject, it is impor- tant for a medical jurist to bear in mind that infants and young persons are liable to be killed by small doses of opium; they appear to be peculiarly sus- ceptible of the effects of this poison. Dr. Ramisch, of Prague, met Avith an instance of a child, four months old, that Avas nearly killed by the adminis- tration of one grain of Dover's poAvder, containing only the tenth part of a grain of opium;—the child suffered from stupor and other alarming symptoms. The following case occurred in June 1822. Four grains of Dover's poAvder (containing less than half a grain of opium) Avere given to a child four years and a half old. It soon became comatose, and died in seven hours. Death Avas referred to inflammation of the throat, and the jury re- turned the usual unmeaning verdict of ' Died by the visitation of God ;' but there was no doubt, from the evidence, that death Avas caused by the opiate medicine. Dr. Kelso met Avith an instance in Avhich a child, nine months old, was killed in nine hours by four drops (minims ?) of laudanum, equal to only one-fifth part of a grain of opiimi; it A\'as much convulsed before death. A case is referred to in the ' Medical Gazette,' in Avhich tAvo drops (minims?) of laudanum, equal to the tenth part of a grain of opium, killed an infant. The following is another illustration of the fatal effects of a similar dose. A nurse gave to an infant, five days old, txco drops (minims?) of laudaiuim, about three o'clock in the morning. Five hours afterwards the child Avas found by the medical attendant in a state of complete narcotism. It was revived by a cold bath, but a relapse came on, and it died the same evening, about eighteen hours after the poison liad been given to it. On inspection, the brain and abdominal viscera Avere found in a perfectly healthy .state, and there was no smell of opium in the stomach. (' Prov. Med. Journ.' Oct. 28, 1846, p. 519.) The fiital dose here, as in the former case, Avas equal to the tenth part of a grain of opium, and to only an infinitesimal dose of morphia ! Dr. E. Smith has reported a case (' Lancet,' April 15, 1854), in Avhich an infant, seven days old, died in eighteen hours from the effects of one minim of the tincture, or the ticelfth part of a grain of opium. Coma Avith the usual symptoms Avas complete in half an hour. On inspection, the heart Avas found distended with black liquid blood : the lungs Avere collapsed but not con- gested. The brain Avas congested, but there Avas no effusion either into the ventricles or on the surface. (See also 'Med. Times and Gazette,' April 15, 1854, p. 386.) The smallest fatal case recorded (in an infant) was in a case communicated to me by Dr. Edwards of Liverpool (November, 1857). An mfant, four Aveeks old, died from the symptoms of poisoning'by opium in fr-even hours after a dose of paregoric elixir, equivalent to one-ninetieth of a


[351/1290 b21964944_0351.jp2]

287' PERIOD AT WHICH DEATH TAKES TLACE. grain of opium, had been administered to it. With a knowledge of these lacts, it is not siirprising that infants are occasionally destroyed by opium xmder circumstances in which an adult wotdd not suffer. In December, 1860, an inquiry took place at Chester respecting the death of a child, aged six weeks, under the following circumstances. A fomentation composed of laudanum and gin was applied to the side of the mother, and the child was put to the breast shortly afterwards. The child fell into a sleep from Avhich it did not awaken, and died, in spite of treatment, the next morning. The cause of death was left obscure owing to the imperfect manner in which the inquiry was conducted: but it is not improbable that the child drew a quantity of laudanum into its mouth, sufficient to destroy life. (' Med. Times and Gaz.' Jan. 19, 1861, p. 70.) In some instances infants have been found to manifest an astonishing power of recoveiy. Dr. Guy met with a case in which an infant of six months recovered after having had administered to it ten grains of Dover's poAvder, equal to one grain of opium (' Lancet,' June 8, 1850); and Mr. Tubbs has informed me, that in a case which occurred in January 1852, an infant of nine months recovered under treatment from a dose of two teaspoonfuls of laudanum, given by mistake. This quantity left by evaporation four grains of an impure extract of opium. In 1860 a case was communicated to me in which an infant of between two and three months old, recovered after Jive grains of opium had been given to it by mistake for rhubarb. Dr. Hays met with a case in which a child not quite six years old, swallowed a powder containing seven and a half grains of opium mixed with powdered chalk. The child was not seen until fourteen hours afterwards. It was at first excited : there had been no vomiting. The narcotism was at no time very profound: it gradually subsided, and at the end of three days the child had recovered ! ('Am. Jour. Med. Sci.' Aj)ril 1859, p. 367.) Period at which Death takes place.—It has been remarked, that most cases of poisoning by opium prove fatal in from about six to twelve hours. They who recover fi-om the stupor, and survive longer than this period, generally do well; but fi-om cases above related (see p. 284), it would seem that there may be a partial recovery, or a remission of the symptoms, and afterwards a relapse. The symptoms, however, generally progress steadily to a fatal ter- mination, or the stupor suddenly disappears, vomiting ensue.s, and the person recovers. Several instances are recorded of this poison having destroyed life in from seven to nine hours. One has occurred within my knowledge, in which an adult died in five hours after taking the drug prescribed for him by a quack. Dr. Christison met with a case which could not have lasted above five, and another is mentioned by him which lasted only three hours. Mr. Barwis, of Melton, communicated to me the case of an adult (November 1863) which proved llital in three hours and a half Nearly two ounces of laudanum had been taken : but there was no smell of opium in the stomach when inspected thirty hours after death. Dr. Beck quotes a case which proved fatal in two hours and a half (' Beck, Med. Jur.' p. 873.) Mr. Procter, of York, conununicated to me the case of a female, a3t. 50, who in January 1857, swallowed an ounce of laudanum of the phar- macopoeial strength, and died from the effects in less ^ than two hours. Opium Avas found in the stomach. The only appearance in the body was a congested state of the membranes of the brain. The most rapid case of death yet reported, was that of a soldier who was accidentally poisoned, in September 1846, in the Hospital of Val-de-Grace. It appears that ho swallowed by mistake about an ounce of laudanum, and it is stated that he died in convulsions in th-ee quarters of an hour. (' Journal de Medecine,' Oct. 1846, p. 475. For a similar case, see ' Med. Gaz.' vol. 45, p. 743.) It is


[352/1290 b21964944_0352.jp2]

POISONING BY rorriES. godfkp:y's coiidial. 288 possible that tlie drug may destroy life even Avith greater rapidity than this; but, as a medico-legal fact, we are at present entitled to state, that it has destroyed life within the short period above mentioned. On the other hand, the cases are sometimes much protracted. There are several instances of death in fifteen or seventeen hours. I have known one case fatal in twenty-two hours, and among those collected by Dr. Christison, the longest lasted twenty- four hours. (Op. cit. 712.) Poisoning by Poppies. The heads of the Avhite poppy grown in this country, possess narcotic pro- perties. They yield an inspissated extract called English opium, which, according to Mr. Ilennell, contains five per cent, of morphia. The white poppy-heads, therefore, yield to water, in the form of decoction, a poisonous substance capable of acting deleteriously on children. In July, 18G3, a child died at Bilston, in consequence of its mother having administered to it two teaspoonfuls of water in Avhich a poppy-head had been boiled. (' Med. Times and Gaz ,' July 18, 1863, p. 75.) Many cases of poisoning have occurred from the injudicious use of Syrup of poppies^ which is nothing more than a sweetened decoction of the poppy-heads. This syrup is said to contain one grain of ex- tract (opium) to one ounce (Thomson). The common dose of it, for an infant three or four months old, is half a drachm ; for adults, two to four drachms. ('Pereira,' vol. 2, pt. 2, p. 643.) There is some reason to believe that what is often sold by many druggists imder the name of syrup of poppies as a sooth- ing or cordial medicine for children, is nothing more than a mixture of tincture or effusion of opium with simple syrup : it is therefore a preparation of vari- able strength. This may account for what appears to many persons inexplic- able, namely, that an infant may be destroyed by a small dose. In January, 1841, a child six months old is said to have died from the effects of less than half a teaspoonful of syrup of poppies bought at a druggist's. The narcotic symptoms were fully developed in three quarters of an hour. The syru]! in this case probably contained tincture of opium. Several children are reported to have lost their lives by this syrup in 1837-8. In one of these instances, a teaspoonful and a half was given, Stujsor came on in half an hour, and the child died the following day. A teaspoonful has been known to prove fatal to a healthy child. (' Pereira,' vol. 2, pt. 2, p. 644.) Godfrey's Cordial. This is chiefly a mixture of infusion of sassafras, treacle, and tincture of opium. The quantity of tincture of opium contained in it is stated by the late Dr. Paris to be one drachm in six ounces of the mixture, or half a grain of opinm to one ounce: but it is probable that, like the so-called syrup of poppies, its strength is subject to variation. A case has been reported, in Avhich half a teaspoonful, = 1-32nd part of a grain of opium, was alleged to have caused the death of an infant. In 1837-8, twelve children were reported to have been killed by this mixture alone. The explanation of this is, that the medicine usually is given in large doses by ignorant persons. Dalby's Carminative, This is a compound of several essential oils and aromatic tinctures in pepper- mint water, with carbonate of magnesia and tincture of opium, Accordinrr to the late Dr. Paris there are f ve minims of the tincture, or one quarter of a grain of opium, in rather more than two ounces of this mixture, or the one- eighth of a grain in an ounce. The formula commonly given is carbonate of magnesia two scruples, oil of peppermint one minim, of nutmegs two minims, of aniseed three minims, tincture of opium five minims, spirit of pennyroyai and tincture of assafoctida of each fifteen minims, tincture of castor and


[353/1290 b21964944_0353.jp2]

PAREGORIC ELIXIR. DOVER'S POWDER. BLACK DROP. 289 compound tinctui'e of cardamoms of each tliirty minims, and of peppermint "Water two ounces. According to this formula, tincture of opium forms the 1-211 th part by measure, or one teaspoonful contains the l-64th part of a grain of opium. Like most of these quack preparations, it varies in strength. An infant is reported to have been destroyed by forU/ drops of this nostrum, a quantity, according to the strength assigned, equivalent to more than two minims of the tincture, or from one-sixth to one-tenth of a grain, of opium. Accidents frequently occur from its use, paitly owing to ignorance, and partly to gross carelessness on the part of mothers and nui-ses. The quack preparation, known under tlie name of Locock^s pulmonic wafers, contains opium. A boy, eet. 4, suffered from all the usual symptoms of poi- soning by opium as a result of eating a quantity of these wafers or lozenges. (' Lancet,' Oct. 27, 18G0, p. 420.) Paregoric Elixir. (Camphorated Tincture of Opium.) This is a medicinal preparation of alcohol, opium, benzoic acid, oil of anise and camphor. Opium is the active ingredient, and of this the tincture contains rather less than one grain in every half ounce (nine grains to five ounces). In one case of poisoning by this tinctm-e, a child aged seven months died from the effects of a teaspoonful (equal to one quarter of a grain of opium) given in two doses at an interval of a day. (' Pharmaceutical Journal,' April 1845.) In another an infant of five weeks recovered from a similar dose, al- though no treatment was resorted to for nine hours. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' Aug. 6, 1859, p. 145.) An infant has been killed by a dose equivalent to not more than the ninetieth part of a grain of opium (ante, p. 286). Dover's Powder. (Powder of Ipecacuan and Opium.) This is a preparation of opium, the effects of which on infants and children have been already described (p. 286). The proportion of opium is one-tenth part or one grain in every ten grains of the powder. A child has been killed by four grains ; therefore by a quantity containing about two-fiflhs of a grain of opium. Dr. Brown, of Lahore, relates the case of a child at fourteen months, who took by mistake six grains of Dover's powder—equivalent to six-tenths of a grain of opium—at six o'clock, p.m. In a quarter of an hour he felt drowsy and fell asleep ; at two o'clock, a.m., eight hours after taking the poison, he had severe convulsions; his pupils were dilated, and his pulse was slow and irregular. He remained insensible, and died at three, a.m., nine hours after taking the powder. (On 'Poisons in the Punjab,' 1863, p. 71.) On tht other hand, Mr. Ewens met with a case in which an infant of nine months recovered from a dose of five grains. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' May 19, 1860.) Dr. Guy has reported another, in which an infant of six month.'* recovered, under active treatment, from a dose of ten grains. (' Lancet,' June 8, 1850.) I am indebted for a still more remarkable instance of re- covery to Mr. R. Read, of Dublin. Fifteen grains of Dover's powder were given to an infant under five months of age. The mistake was discovered immediately, and by active treatmetit the child recovered. Black Drop. This is a preparation of opium, in which the morphia is combined with acetic acid, and very little meconic acid is present. In the black drop, according to Pereira (' Mat. Med.' vol. 2, Pt. 2, p. 650), verjuice, the juice of the wild crab, is employed as a solvent instead of vinegar. The black drop is considered to have from three to four times the strength of the tinc- ture of opium. The formula for this preparation will be found in Dr. Neligan's work, ' On Medicines,' &c., p. 235. According to this, it is a u


[354/1290 b21964944_0354.jp2]

290 SEDATIVE SOLUTION. CHLORODYNE. NEPENTHE. compound of half a pound of opium to three pints of the expressed juice of the wild crab. It resembles the Acetum Ojni, and has more than twice the strength of laudanum. Sedative Solution. (Battley's.) This is an aqueous solution of opium holding a little spirit and less meconic acid than the common tincture. (' Pereira,' vol. 2, Pt. 2, p. 646.) It is ■ considered to have three times the strength of tincture of opium; but there ' is so great a difference of opinion on this point, that Dr. Neligan represents it as being only of about the same strength as laudanum. (' Medicines,' &c., p. 236.) He states that it is composed of three ounces of extract of opium, six drachms of spirit, and as much distilled water as will make up two pints. It appears to be in some cases an energetic preparation. Mr. Streeter stated at the Westminster Medical Society, Dec. 1838, that he had known one drachm and a half of it prove fatal to a lunatic; and twenty minims of the solution destroyed the life of an old woman. A medical gentleman, lying dangerously ill from an attack of dysentery, took, by mistake, about seven drachms of Battley's solution. Within five minutes, salt and water, Avith mustard, were administered, and twenty-four grains of sulphate of zinc. Vomiting ensued ; the emetic was repeated, and with the same effect; the fluid evacuated at the second vomiting having the usual smell of opium. Half a drachm of ipecacuanha was subsequently given to complete the emptying of the stomach. Notwithstanding repeated vomiting, symptoms of' narcotism presented themselves speedily, with contraction of the pupils, and great drowsiness—rendering it necessary to remove the patient from bed in his debilitated state, and keep him constantly moving, until about nine, p.m. (seventeen hours), Avhen vomiting came on spontaneously, and he was put to bed and allowed to sleep. The original disease afterwards resumed its course (complicated by an attack of gastritis), and at length terminated favourably ; but the patient had no recollection of what had occurred for twenty-four ■ hours after the administration of the emetics; and it appeared to his medical attendants that an excited state of mind remained for some days afterwards. (' Prov. Journ.' Jan. 28, 1846, p. 42.) Tlie death of Dr. Badeley, of Chelms- ford, from a dose of this solution taken medicinally, furnishes an additional proof of the dangerous uncertainty in the strength of this solution. Chlorodyne. This is a compound of opium, chloroform, and prussic acid ; it is flavoured with sugar and some essential oils. On standing, it separates into two liquids; one Avhich floats, and is of a pale straw colour; another containing chloroform, which is heavy and of a brown colour and syrupy consistency. A fluid drachm yielded by evaporation twenty-seven grains of a brown saccharine extract. Prussic acid may be detected in it by the vapour test (nitrate of silver), and meconic acid, morphia and chloroform by their appropriate tests. Unless cautiously employed, it may give rise to accidents. Nepenthe. In a case recently tried at the Chester Assizes, the nature of the compound sold under the above name was a subject of enquiry. It is a pale sherry-coloured liquid, of a spirituous odour, with the smell of opium, and an acid reaction It contains 3-4 per cent, of solid matter, consisting chiefly of a purified extract o opium with a small quantity of sugar. It may be regarded as a purified alcoho ic solution of meconate of morphia, with a little excess of acid, and of about the same strength as laudanum. It has a similar mode of action


[355/1290 b21964944_0355.jp2]

SYMPTOMS OF POISONING BY MORPHIA AND ITS SALTS. 291 Morphia and its Salts. Morphia is the poisonous alkaloid of opium, of which it forms from live to ten per cent. The two principal salts of this alkaloid are the hydrochlouate and the acetate. Symptoms.—The symptoms generally commence in from Jive to twenty minutes after the dose of poison (if in solution) has been swallowed ; and they closely resemble those observed in poisoning by opium. As a summary, it may be stated that they consist in dimness of sight, weakness and relaxation of the muscular system, tendency to sleep, stupor, loss of consciousness, coma, stertorous respiration, and more commonly than in poisoning by opium, there are convulsions. According to Orfila, in nineteen-twentieths of all cases the pupils will be found strongly contracted, a statement which I believe to be correct: the few exceptional cases were those in which the dose Avas excessive, and the symptoms were imusually violent. The state of the pupils gave rise to a great difference of opinion among the medical witnesses on the trial of Dr. Castaing. (' On Poisons ;' 2nd ed. page 619.) The condition of the pulse varies greatly. In some cases there is great irritability, as well as itching of the skin, and irritability of the bladder with difficulty of passing tirine. Vomiting and purging have been met with in those instances in which the dose Avas large. Fatal Dose.—Four cases are recorded in which a dose of one grain of hydrochlorate of morphia has proved fatal to adults : in one it was taken in solution ; in a second in a pill; in a third in a powder; and in a fourth it was administered by injection into the tissue under the skin of the forearm. The first of the cases occurred to Dr. Paterson in Dec. 1845. (' Ed. Monthly Journal,' Sept.|1845, p. 195.) The morphia was taken in divided doses, in six hours. The symptoms and appearances were of the usual character, and insensibility came on rapidly. The patient died in about seven hours. The second case occurred at St. Mary's Hospital, May 1861 : a man £et. 45 died in thirteen hours from a dose of one grain of hydrochlorate of morphia, prescribed in a pill by one of the physicians. The symptoms came on in about three hours, and were of a well-marked character. No morphia was detected in the stomach or other organs, and its operation as a poison was ascribed, without any apparent ground, to disease of the kidneys. In the third case (March 1863), I was consulted by Mr. Charsley, Coroner for Bucks. A healthy man, set. 52, died in about ten hoursTrom the effects of one grain. Three hours after taking the powder, he lost his senses of smelling and hearing, and passed rapidly into a comatose condition, from which he did not recover (case of Cordcry, Burnham, March 1863.) The practitioner who prescribed the morphia alleged that he had given only half a grain, but the facts of the case were adverse to this statement. On analysis I could detect no morphia in the stomach. The fourth case occurred at the Middlesex Hospital, in May 1863. I am indebted for the particulars to Mr. De Morgan, under whose care the patient was placed. One third of a grain of morphia was injected at night under the skin : in two hours the injection of a similar quantity was repeated. On the next morning another third of a grain was injected. The man .slept quietly for two hours. Pie then took some dinner, and talked in his usual way; but in another hour he became almost suddenly insensible, and in two hours he died, the narcotic symptoms being most powerfully developed. Dr. Anstey met with a case in which three grains of morphia given as an injection per rectum caused death in sixteen hours. The hydrochlorate is thus proved to be a powerful poison in a small dose : it may operate either suddenly or slowly and destroy life rapidly. An infant has died from a dose of one twelfth part of a grain. (' Chem. News,' Aug. 22,1863, u 2


[356/1290 b21964944_0356.jp2]

292 APPEARANCES IN POISONING BY MOEPHIA. p. 98.) Dr. Cliristison considers that one grain of the hydrochlorate is fully equal in power to six grains of the best Turkey opium. There is no reason to suppose that the acetate is less potent: but there are some remarkable instances of recovery where such a result could scarcely have been anticipated. In the ' Lancet,' for 1863, vol. 1, p. 8, is reported the case of a child about two years of age, who recovered from a dose of one gram of the acetate. Appearances.—The only appearance which can be referred to the action of morphia is fulness of the cerebral vessels, with occasionally serous effusion. This poison has no local irritant action, and it therefore leaves no marks of its operation in the stomach and bowels. An account of the appearances produced by an overdose of sulphate of morphia has been published by Orfila in a report of the case of Dr. Ellenherger. ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1852, vol. 2, p. 359.) The case presents some curious features. The deceased imagined that he had discovered a certain antidote for morphia and its salts, and pro- posed, while Orfila was at Prague in October 1851, to swallow the poison and the antidote in his presence. Orfila consented to witness the experiment. A powder was produced, which was found to have a bitter taste, and to possess some of the chemical properties of morphia, evidently mixed, however, with some other substance. The doctor swallowed about twenty-three grains of this powder, and immediately afterwards, his so-called antidote, which was a fine white powder having a sweetish taste. He did not suffer from any symptoms of poisoning. Orfila, with a keen eye to the practical use of anti- dotes, inquired whether he had ever allowed a certain interval to pass before taking the remedy. Dr. Ellenberger said that the results were the same. Six months after this experiment. Dr. Ellenberger died from a dose of about ten grains of sulphate of morphia. He had taken his antidote, but not until a considerable interval had elapsed. A minute inspection of the body Avas made, and the principal appearance was a well-marked congestion of the brain and its membranes. There were traces of sulphate of morphia in the stomach. The so-called antidote was examined, and found to consist of a mixture of magnesia and carbonate of magnesia ! Chemical Analysis. Opium.—There are no means of detecting opium itself, either in its solid or liquid state, except by its smell and other physical properties, or by giving a portion of the suspected substance to animals, and observing whether any narcotic effects are produced. The smell is said to be peculiar, but a similar smell is possessed by lactucarium, which contains neither meconic acid nor morphia. The odour is a good concomitant test of the presence of the drug, whether it be in a free state, or dissolved in alcohol or water, but it is not perceptible when the solution is much diluted. I found that half a grain of powdered opium, dissolved in half an ounce of water, lost its characteristic smell by a short exposure. The odour is decidedly volatile, and passes off when an opiate liquid is heated; it also escapes slowly at com- mon temperatures. Again, it may be easily concealed by other odours, or the drug may undergo some change in the stomach during life which may rapidly destroy the odour. (Case by Mr. Barwis, p. 287.) The analysis in cases of poisoning by opium, is therefore limited to the detection of morphia and the acid Avith which it is combined, meconic acid. Morphia.—Morphia may be identified by the following properties: 1. It crystallizes in fine prisms, which are Avhite and perfect, according to their degree of purity. These ciystals may be obtained by adding weak ammonia to a solution of morphia in hydrochloric acid. {^eQ illustration.) 2. When heated on platinum, the crystals melt, become dark-coloured, and burn like a resin Avith a yellow smoky flame, leaving a carbonaceous residue. If this experiment is performed in a small reduction-tube, it will be found, by em-


[357/1290 b21964944_0357.jp2]

MORrillA AXD ITS SALTS. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. 293 ploying test-paper, that ammonia is one of the products of decomposition. 3. It is scarcely soluble in cold water, as it re- quires 1000 parts to dissolve it: it is soluble in one hundred parts of boiling water, and the hot solution has a faint alkaline reaction. By its insolubility in water, it is readily known fi-om its salts. It is not very soluble in ether, thus differing from narcotina; but it is dissolved by forty parts of cold, and rather less than this quan- tity of boiling alcohol. It is dissolved by a solu- tion of potash or soda, from which it cannot be removed by ether. It is very soluble in acetic ether, and this has been employed as a substitute for ether in procuring morphia from organic liquids. 4. It is easily dissolved by a very small ''^J^'tnt?o'Isl«^^^^^^ quantity of all diluted acids, mineral and vege- ciiiorate, magnified ]24 diameters, table. 5. Morphia and its solutions have a bitter taste. 6. The salts of morphia are not precipitated in a crystalline form by solutions of sulpho- cyanide of potassium, ferrocyanide of potassium, or chromate of potash. In this respect they are strikingly distinguished from the salts of strychnia, which give well-marked crystalline precipitates with these three reagents. 2'ests.—In order to apply the chemical tests for morphia, the alkaloid may be dissolved in a few drops of a diluted acid, either the acetic or the hydro- chloric. If the hydrochlorate or the acetate of morphia is presented for analysis, the salt may be at once dissolved in a small quantity of boiling water. The tests for this alkaloid are the following: 1. Nitric acid. This, when added to a moderately strong solution of a salt of morphia, prodiices slowly a deep orange-red colour. If added to the crystals of morphia or its salts, deutoxide of nitrogen is evolved:—the morphia is entirely dissolved, and the solu- tion acquires instantly the deep red colour above described,—becoming, how- ever, lighter by standing. In order that this effect should follow, the solution of morphia must not be too much diluted, and the acid must be strong and added in pretty large quantity. The colour is rendered much lighter by boil- ing; therefore the test should never be added to a hot solution. 2. Perchloride of iron (sesquichloride), or colourless persulphate. Either of these solutions, when saturated and neutralized (by a small quantity of potash, if necessary), produces an inky-blue colour in a solution of morphia. If the quantity of morphia is small, or the test has a deep red or yellow tint, the colour is greenish. The blue colour is entirely destroyed by acids, and is also de- stroyed by heat: thus the iron-test should never be employed with a very acid or a very hot solution of a salt of morphia. It may be observed, that the blue given by the test in a solution of morphia, is entirely destroyed by nitric acid and replaced by an orange-red colour, so that the nitric acid will act through the iron-test, but not vice versa. In this way two tests may be applied to one quantity of liquid. 3. Iodic acid. Morphia in the solid state or in solution, decomposes this acid, taking part of its oxygen, and setting free iodine. In order to make this evident, the iodic acid should be first mixed with starch ; and a part of this mixture only, added to the suspected solution, —part being reserved, to allow of a comparison. (If the iodic acid be added to a solution of morphia without starch, the liquid becomes brown, and smells of iodine.) When the quantity is very small, there is only a reddish or purple tint slowly produced:—when large, the dark-blue iodide of farina is formed in a few seconds. The colour being destroyed by heat, the test must not be added to a hot solution. The test succeeds equally well with morphia or its salts, when unmixed with organic matter; but the analyst must remember, I


[358/1290 b21964944_0358.jp2]

294 DETECTION OF OPIUM IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS. that the blue iodide of farina forms a colourless combination Avith a large q\iantity of starch: hence but httle of this substance should be used, if the (luantity of morphia is small. 4. Sulphuric acid and bichromate of potash. When strong sulphuric acid is poured on pure morphia in a solid state, there is either no effect, or the alkaloid acquires a light pinkish colour. On adding to this a drop of solution of bichromate of potash, or a small fragment of a crystal, it immediately becomes green (from oxide of chromium), and rctama this colour for some time. Other alkaloids (strychnia) are not thus affected. Narcotina is turned of a bright yellow by sulphuric acid ; therefore, although it becomes green when mixed with bichromate of potash, it could not be mis- taken for morphia : besides, the green rapidly passes to a dingy brown colour. It may sometimes be desirable to determine whether morphia or any vegetable alkaloid is present in a suspected solution. For this purpose we may employ a solution of corrosive sublimate and iodide of potassium—the chloriodide of potas- sium and mercury (iodo-hydrargyrate of potash). If even a small quantity of morphia or any alkaloid is present, a whitish precipitate is thrown down oa adding the test: this precipitate is an insoluble hydribdate of the alkaloid with iodide of mercury. This test is more sensitive with some alkaloids than others. A negative result proves the absence of morphia, provided the solution does not contain a large excess of alcohol or acetic acid, in either of which liquids the alkaloidal precipitate is soluble. It is not affected by ammonia, but gives yellow peroxide of mercury with potash or soda. It may be employed in the analysis of most of the poisonous principles and alkaloids, some of which may by means of it be readily distinguished from others. It is made by dissolving ; sixteen grains of corrosive sublimate and sixty grains of iodide of potassium . in four ounces of water. As it gives a precipitate with albumen, this, wh^n i present, should be first removed by boiling the liquid to be tested. MeconicAcid.—This is a solid crystalline acid, seen commonly in scaly crys- • tals of a reddish colour. It is combined with morphia in opium, of which, according to Mulder, it forms on an average six per cent.; and it serves to render this alkaloid soluble in water and other menstrua. Tests. — Many tests s have been proposed for meconic acid; there is only one upon which any reli- - ance can be placed, namely, the perchloride or persulphate of iron. This test t produces, even in a diluted solution of meconic acid, a deep red colour; and 1 it is owing to the presence of this acid that a salt of iron strikes a red colour r in tmcture and iniusion of opium, as well as in all liquids containing traces of ; meconate of morphia, the effects of the iron-test with morphia being counter- acted by the presence of meconic acid. The red colour of the meconate of iron is not easily destroyed by diluted mineral acids, by a solution of corrosive sublimate, or by chloride of gold, but it is by sulphurous acid and chloride of tin. In liquids containing tannic acid, e. g. tea or beer, the action of this test is obscured. Detection of Opium in Organic Mixtures.—Opium itself may be regarded as an organic solid, containing the poisonous salt which we wish to extract. It is not often that, in fatal cases of poisoning by opium or its tincture, even when these are taken in large quantity and death is speedy, we can succeed in detecting meconate of morphia in the stomach. It is probably removed by vomiting or absorption. If the matter is solid, it should be cut into small slices; if liquid, evaporated to an extract; and, in either case, digested witli a large quantity of rectified spirit slightly acidulated with acetic acid. The residue should be well pressed in linen; the alcoholic liquid should then be evaporated in a water-bath until it is almost dry. The residue should be digested in water filtered and treated with acetate of lead, until there is no further precipitation. This liquid should be boiled and filtered: meconate ol lead IS left on the filter, while any morphia passes through under the form oi


[359/1290 b21964944_0359.jp2]

295 POISONING BY PKUSSIC ACID. acetate. The surplus acetate of lead contained in the filtered liquid (contain- ing the morphia) should now be precipitated by a current of sulphuretted hydrogen—the sulphide of lead separated by filtration, and the liquid evapo- rated at a very gentle heat to an extract, so that any sulphuretted hydrogen may be entirely expelled. On treating this extract with alcohol, the acetate of morphia, it present in sufficient quantity, may be dissolved out and tested. If the alcoholic liquid is still much coloured, it may be again evaporated and taken up by water. Animal charcoal deprives it of colour, but at the same time removes the morphia if this is in small quantity. If there is a sufficient quantity of pure acetate present, the addition of a drop of solution of ammonia to a portion of the liquid on a slide, will produce crystals of the form of slender . prisms which are somewhat deliquescent. The remainder may be tested by the nitric and iodic acids. The meconate of lead left on the filter is readily decomposed by boiling it with a small quantity of diluted sulphuric acid; and in the filtered liquid, neutralized if necessary by an alkali, the meconic acid is easily detected by the iron-test. This analysis requires care as well as some practice in the operator, in order that the morphia should be obtained in a sufficiently pure state for the appli- cation of the tests. Before resorting to this process, it is advisable to employ trial tests on the original liquid, in order to determine whether any meconic acid or morphia is present or not. The smell of opium may be entirely ab- sent. The best trial tests are nitric acid and the permuriate of iron. These will prodijce in the infusion or liquid, if it contain opium, the changes already indicated. In testing for meconic acid, it is advisable to dilute the oi-ganic liquid, if coloured, with a sufficient quantity of water to render the production of a change of colour by the test perceptible. In respect to this method of detecting the meconate of morphia in a suspected liquid, it is proper to ob- serve, that nitric acid will indicate the presence of morphia, and perchloride of iron the presence of meconic acid, in infusions containing so small a quan- tity of opium as not to be precipitated by the acetate of lead. The chief difficulty in the detection of morphia is that the alkaloid does not form more than one-tenth part of opium, and the quantity of opium present in an organic liquid is generally very small. In consequence of the comparative insolubility of morphia in ether, Stas's process is not adapted for its separation from organic liquids. It has been lately suggested to employ acetic ether, as morphia is much more soluble in this liquid. CHAPTER 25. PRUSSIC ACID—SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES—FATAL DOSE—TESTS FOR THE ACID PROCESS FOR ORGANIC MIXTURES. CYANIDE OF POTASSIUM. ESSENTIAL OIL of bitter almonds. Hydrocyanic or Prussic Acid. Si/mptoms.—This acid has a hot bitter taste and an odour resembling that of bitter almonds diluted. The time at which the symptoms of poisoning commence in the human subject, is liable to great variation from circum- stances not well understood. When a large dose has been taken, as from half an ounce to an ounce of the diluted acid, the symptoms usually com- mence in the act of swallowing, or within a few seconds. It is rare that their appearance is delayed beyond one or two viinutes. When the patient has been seen at this period, he has been perfectly insensible, the eyes fixed and glistening, the pupils dilated and unaffected by light, the limbs flaccid, the skin cold and covered with a clammy perspiration; there is convulsive


[360/1290 b21964944_0360.jp2]

296 PRUSSic ACID. sy:mptom?. respiration at long interval'*, and the patient appears dead in the intermediate period; the pulse is imperceptible, and involuntary evacuations are oc- casionally passed. The respiration is slow, deep, gasping, and sometmies heaving, or sobbing. The following case communicated to me by Mr. French, presents a fair example of the immediate effects of this poison in a large and flxtal dose. A medical man swallowed seven drachms of the common prussic acid. lie smwived about four or five minutes, but was quite msensible when discovered, i.e. about two minutes after he had taken the poison. He was foiuid lying on the floor senseless,—there were no convulsions of the limbs or trunk, but a faint flickering motion was observed about the muscles of the lips. The process of respiration appeared to cease entirely for some seconds : it was then performed in convulsive fits, and the act of expiration. Avas remarkably deep, and lasted for a very long time. When the dose is large, the breath commonly exhales a strong odour of the acid, and this is also perceptible in the room. Convulsions of the limbs and trunk, with spasmodic closure of the jaws, are usually met with among the symptoms; the finger-nails have been found of a livid colour, and the hands firmly clenched. The breathing is generally convulsive, but when the coma or in- sensibility is profound, it is sometimes stertorous. This was noticed in a case which occurred to Dr. Christison. (' Edinburgh Monthly Journal,' Feljruary, 1850, p. 97.) It was also observed in the case oiMarcoolcTj {Keg. v. Boronghs, C.C.C., February, 1857). Stertorous breathing has not been hitherto re- corded by toxicologists as one of the symptoms of poisoning by prussic acid. In the inquiry which took place at Eugeley, in Januaiy, 185G, respecting the death of Walter Palmer, it was contended that the fact of the deceased having had stertorous breathing was a proof that he had died from apoplexy, and not, as it was alleged, fi.-om prussic acid; but the facts here recorded show that such an inference is erroneous. When a small dose {i.e. about thirty minims of a weak acid) has been taken, the individual has first experienced weight and pain in the head, with con- fusion of intellect, giddiness, nausea, a quick pulse, and loss of muscular power; these symptoms are, however, sometimes slow in appearing. Vomiting has been occasionally observed, but it is more common to find foaming at the mouth, with suffusion or a bloated ai^pearance of the face, and prominence of the eyes. If death results, this is preceded by tetanic spasms, opisthotonos, and involuntary evacuations. Vomiting is sometimes the precursor of re- covery. (See cases in ' Medical Gazette,' vol. 36, p. 103 ; vol. 35, pp. 859, 893.) A case which occurred to Mr. Bishop (' Prov. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' Aug. 13, 1845, p. 517) was remarkable in several particulars : the individual swallowed, it was supposed, forty minims of an acid (at three and a quarter per cent.), and was able to give an account of his symptoms. He was con- scious for some time after he had taken it, and he recollected experiencing the sensation of his jaws becoming gradually stiff and tight. One of the most marked effects of prussic acid is to produce insensibility and loss of muscular power, much more speedily than any other poison. In some instances, there may be loss of consciousness in a, few seconds ; in others, certain acts indica- tive of volition and locomotion may be performed, although requiring for their performance several minutes. Appearances.—The body when seen soon after death often exhales the odour of prussic acid; but if it has remained exposed before it is seen, and if it has been exposed to the open air or in a shower of rain, the odour may not be perceptible; again the odour may be concealed by tobacco-smoke, peppermint, or other powerful odours. In a case in Avhich a person poisoned hmiself with two ounces of the acid, and his body was examined twenty-eight hours after death, the vapour of prussic acid which escaped on opening the


[361/1290 b21964944_0361.jp2]

297 PRUSSIC ACID. APPEARANCES IN THE BODY. stomach, was so powerful that the iiis|)ectors were seized with dizziness. lu cases of suicide or accident, the vessel out of which the poison has been taken Avill commonly be found near; but there is nothing to preclude the possibility of a person throwing it from him in the last act of life, or even concealing it, if the symptoms should be delayed. (See case by Dr. Christison, page 298.) Owing to the great volatility of the poison, the vessel, if left uncorked, may not retain the odour when found. Putrefiiction is said to be accelerated in these cases; but from what I have been able to collect, there seems to be no ground for this opinion (p. 57; also case in 'Prov. Med. Journ.' July 30, 1845). Externally, the skin is commonly livid, or is tinged of a violet colour; the nails are blue, the lingers clenched, and the toes contracted ; the jaws firmly closed, with foam or fioth about the mouth, the face often pallid, but some- times bloated and swollen, and the eyes have been observed to be wide open, fixed, glassy, very prominent and glistening, and the pupils dilated; but similar condition of the eyes has been observed in other kinds of violent death. Intenialh/, the venous system is gorged with dark-coloured liquid blood ; the stomach and intestines may be in their natural state; but in several instances they have been found more or less congested. The mucous mem- brane of the stomach of a dog which died in a few minutes from a dose of three drachms of Scheele's acid, was intensely reddened throughout, pre- senting the appearance met with in cases of arsenical poisoning. In a large number of experiments upon dogs, Mr. Nunneley states that he found generally a congested condition of the nuicous membrane of the stomach : if empty at the time the poison was taken, the organ was found much contracted, and of a brick-red colour. This appearance of congestion was observed on the mucous membrane of the vagina, the rectum, and conjunctiva, when the acid was applied to these parts. (' Prov. Trans.' N.S. vol. 3, p. 79.) Eedness of the stomach was noticed in the case of the Parisian epileptics. (' Annales d'Hygiene,' 1829, vol. 1, p. 507.) Dr. Geoghegan, of Dublin, communicated to me the particulars of a case in which this redness of the mucous mem- brane was well marked. In April 1847, a healthy man, a2t. 30, swallowed a large dose of prussic acid. He was soon afterwards found dead in his bed. The body was inspected in five hours: rigidity had then commenced, and there was some warmth. The face was pale, the eyes were half closed, not presenting any remarkable brilliancy or prominence, and there was great dilatation of the pupils. The mouth was closed, and no froth issued from it. The abdomen was the only cavity examined. The muscles were red, and gave out, on section, a good deal of fluid blood, which had a strong odour of prussic acid; the odour of the poison was also perceptible in the abdomen. About eight ounces of a thick farinaceous mass were found in the stomach : the odour of prussic acid was very perceptible in this organ, but it was mixed with that of rancid food. The mucous membrane had everywhere, except at the greater end and posterior wall, a vivid inflammatory redness, of a well- marked character, and it was covered with a layer of viscid mucus to a con- siderable extent. The mucous membrane, even when washed three times in water, gave out a strong odour of prussic acid. In a case which I examined in May 1850, in which death had been caused by a large dose of the acid, there was a generally congested state of the mucous membrane of the stomach. I am indebted to Mr. Blaker, of Lewes, for an account of the appearances found in the body of a medical student who destroyed himself, in March 1860, by swallowing about one drachm of Scheele's acid. lie was found in a state of collapse, and breathing heavily in about half a minute from the time at which he was last seen. He died in twenty minutes. The coats of the stomach were greatly congested towards the cardiac end. Tlie minute vessels throughout were filled with dark blood, and there were some spots of effused


[362/1290 b21964944_0362.jp2]

PEUSSIC ACID. FATAL DOSE. 298 blood beneath the mucous coat. The intestines were highly congested, the small vessels being visible all over the coats. There was no congestion of the membranes of the brain. Quantity required to destroy Life.—The smallest dose of this acid Avhich is reported to have caused death, was in a case which occurred to Mr. Hicks. (' Med. Gaz.' vol. 35, p. 896.) The female, a healthy adult, died in twenty minutes from a dose equivalent to nine-tenths of a grain of anhydrous prussic acid. This was equivalent to about twenty grains of Scheele's acid. In a case reported by Mr. T. Taylor (' Med. Gaz.' vol. 36, p. 104), a stout healthy man swallowed this dose, i.e. nine-tenths of a grain, by mistake, and remained insensible for four horirs, when he vomited and began to recover. The vomited matters had no odour of the poison, showing that, if not concealed by other odours, the whole of the acid must have been absorbed. He had a very narrow escape of his life. Dr. Banks has published a case in which a female recovered after swallowing thirty drops of prussic acid. (' Ed. Med. and Surg. Jour.' vol, 48, p. 44.) The largest dose from which an adult has recovered, was probably in a case which has been reported by Mr. Burman. (' Lancet,' Jan. 14, 1854.) His father, ajt. GO, of a strong constitution, took by mistake a drachm of prussic acid, equivalent to 2 "4 grains of anhy- drous acid. In a few seconds he perceived the mistake, and swalloAved half an ounce of aromatic spirits of ammonia with a little water. Four minutes after taking the poison, cold affusion was employed, and sulphate of iron and spirits of ammonia were administered. Vomiting with convulsive shuddering and insensibility took place. In twenty minutes, consciousness returned, and fifteen minutes later, he was able to walk iip-stairs to bed. He perfectly re- covered, but in the absence of the early treatment resorted to, it is most pro- bable that he would have died. Dr. Christison has reported in the ' Edinburgh Monthly Journal' (Feb. 1850, p. 97) the case of an adult who recovered after having taking a dose equivalent to a grain and a half or two grains of anhydrous acid. The treatment consisted in the evacuation of the stomach by the stomach- pump, and in pouring a current of cold water on the head. The .symptoms were such that the man would have died, but for immediate treatment. It is a remarkable fact that in this case no bottle or vessel could be found in the room or under the window. The patient ha.stily summoned his wife one evenino- told her that he had taken prussic acid, and immediately fell down senseless on a sofa, without either cry or convulsion, but drawing his breath deeply, forcibly, and slowly. He recovered in about three hours, but had an unusual disposition to sleep even on the following day. Another remarkable case of recovery from a dose nearly as large occurred to Mr. Bishop. (' Prov. Med. Jour.' Aug. 13, 1845, p. 517.) From the facts hitherto observed, we shall not be wrong in assuming that a quantity of Scheele's acid (at five per cent.) above twenty grains (i. e. one grain of anhydrous acid), or an equivalent portion of any other acid, would commonly suffice to destroy the life of an adult. This I beheve to be the nearest approach that we can make to the smallest fatal dose. In Beg. v. Bidl, tried at Lewes Autumn Assizes 1860 a question arose respecting the minimum fatal dose of this poison. The accused a young medical man, was charged Avith the manslaughter of his mother a woman xt. 66, He had prescribed prussic acid for her to relieve sickness He procured a bottle of Scheele's acid, said to contain one drachm. He administered four minims to deceased in the morning, and it appeared to benefit her. In the evening he gave to her another dose amounting, accord- ing to his statement, to ' seven drops.' The deceased went up-staire, became msensiblc, and died in a few minutes. When the bottle was examined twenty-five minims remained in it: hence thirty-five minims were alle"-ed to be mis.sing, but the druggist who sold the acid poured out the quantity


[363/1290 b21964944_0363.jp2]

299 PRUSSIC ACID. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. conjcctm-.ally, and the bottle Avas found to have a broken cork. The strength of the acid had not been determined. Under these circumstances the prisoner was acquitted. In this case the Court desired to know the relation of drops to minims; but no satisfactory answer could be given. The size of a drop materially depends on the nature of the liquid, the mouth of the bottle, and the rapidity of the measurement. Seven drops of Scheele's acid dropped from a small phial measured seven minims. There can be no doubt in the above case that the poison caused death, and imless we assume that seven drops or minims will destroy life, which is not probable, the deceased must have taken a much larger dose than the accused had intended. Period at ivhich Death takes place.—When the dose is two drachms and upwards, we may probably take the average period for death at Irom tivo to ten minntes. In Mr. Hicks's case, twenty grains of Scheele's acid destroyed life in twenty minutes. It is only when the dose is just in a fatal proportion, that we find a person to survive from half an hour to an hour. In this respect, death by prussic acid is like death by lightning, the person in general either dies speedily or recovers altogether. According to Dr. Lonsdale, death has occurred in the human subject as early as the second, and as late as the forty-fifth minute. But although death does not commonly ensue until after the lapse of a few minutes, insensibility, and consequently a want of power to perform acts of volition and locomotion, may come on sometimes in a few seconds. The time at Avhich this loss of miiscular power is supposed to take place, has frequently become an important medico-legal question ; and on the answer to it the hypothesis of suicide or murder in a particular case may rest. Chemical Analysis.—Prussic acid is limpid like water ; it possesses a faint acid reaction, and its vapour has a peculiar odour, which when the acid is concentrated, although not at first perceptible, is sufficient to produce giddi- ness, insensibility, and other alarming symptoms. The tests which are best adapted for the detection of this poison, either in liquid or vapour, are equally applicable wliether the acid is concentrated or diluted, • and, so far as the detection of the vapour is concerned, whether the acid is pure or mixed. In the simple state, the tests are three in number : the Silver, the Iron, and the /Sulphur tests. 1. The Silver Test. Nitrate of Silver.—This yields, with prussic acid, a dense white precipitate, speedily subsiding in heavy clots to the bottom of the vessel, and leaving the liquid almost clear. The precipitate is identified as cyanide of silver by the following properties:—a. It is insoluble in cold nitric acid; but when drained of water, and a sufficient quantity of strong acid is added, it is easily dissolved on boiling, b. It evolves prussic acid when digested in hydrochloric acid. c. The precipitate, when ivell dined, and heated in a small reduction tube, yields cyanogen, which may be burnt as it issues, producing a rose-red fiame with a blue halo. This is a well- marked character, and at once identifies the acid which yielded the precipitate as prussic acid. By this property, the cyanide is emi- nently distinguished from all the other salts of silver. In the employment of the silver-test for the detection of the vajjour of the poison, we place a few drops of the silver solution in a watch-glass, and invert it over another watch- glass or beaker containing the suspected poi- sonous liquid. Cyanide of silver, indicated by crystals of cyanide of silver from the formation of an opaque Avhite film in the so- the yaponr of prussic acid magiiiflcd .,. , ^ , 1 • /> 1 • 124 diameters. lution, IS niimediately produced, it only in a


[364/1290 b21964944_0364.jp2]

300 PRUSSIC ACID. SILVER, IRON, AND SULPHUR TESTS. moderate state of concentration. One drop of a diluted acid containing less than l-50th of a grain of the anhydrous acid produces speedily a visible effect. When the prussic acid is more diluted, a few minutes are re- quired ; and the opaque film begins to shoAv itself at the edges of the silver solution. In this case the action may be accelerated by the heat of the hand. If the vapour is allowed to reach the nitrate of silver gradually and much diluted with air, then instead of an opaque film of cyanide of silver, crystals well defined under the microscope will be slowly produced, and these will constitute an additional proof of the presence of the acid in a state of vapour. As shown in the illustration (p. 299), these crystals have the form of slender prisms with oblique terminations. They often hang together in groups, and generally require a high magnifying power to render them visible. 2. The Iron-Test.—The object of the application of this test, is the produc- tion of Prussian Blue. We add to a small quantity of the suspected poisonous liquid, a few drops of jwtash and of a solution of green sulphate of iron. A dirty green or brownish precipitate falls ; on shaking this for a few minutes, and then adding diluted hydrochloric or sulphuric acid, the liquid becomes blue; and Prussian blue, of its well-known colour, unaffected by diluted acids, subsides. If the prussic acid is in small quantity, the liquid is at first yellow, from the salt of iron formed; it then becomes green, but the precipi- tate ultimately subsides so as to appear of a blue colour in the mass. The iron-test may be employed for the detection of the vapour of prussic acid, by the same method as that described in speaking of the silver-test. For this purpose we place a few drops of a solution of potash in a Avatch-glass or saucer, and invert it over the suspected liquid. After a few minutes' exposure a drop of solution of green sulphate of iron may be added, and then a drop of diluted hydrochloric acid, when Prussian blue will appear. The silver and the iron- tests may be easily conjoined in testing the same qiiantity of poison. If the precipitated cyanide of silver, obtained by the addition of nitrate of silver to the suspected liquid, is dried and then moistened with strong hydrochloric acid, the vapour may be-collected in a watch-glass or saucer, on the plan above described. Prussian blue will be procured, and thus corroborate the action of the silver-test. 3. The Sulphur-Test.—Some years since Liebig proposed the following pro- cess for detecting prussic acid as a liquid. (' Oesterreichische Med. Wochen- schrift,' Marz 27,1847, p. 396.) If a small quantity of the bisulphide of ammo- nium is added to a few drops of a solution of prussic acid, and the mixture is gently warmed, it becomes colourless, and, on evaporation, leaves crystals of sul- phocyanate of ammonia—the sulphocyanic acid being indicated by the intense blood-red colour produced on adding to the dry residue a solution of a nearly neutral persalt of iron : this red colour immediately disappears on adding a few drops of a solution of corrosive sublimate. The colour is also destroyed by strong acids, and its intensity is diminished by moderate dilution with Avater. This process is very delicate, and it therefore requires some care in its application : thus, if the boiling and evaporation are not carried far enough, the persalt of iron Avill be precipitated black by the undecomposed sulphide ; and, if the heat be carried too far, the sulphocyanate of ammonia may itself undergo decompo- sition, and be lost. It will be perceived, too, that it requires a longer time for its application than either the silver or the iron-test. If the prussic acid contains traces of Prussian blue or a salt of iron, it will acquire a dark colour on the addition of the sulphide. The great utility of the sulphur-test, however, is in its application to the detection of the minutest portion of prussic acid when in a state of vapour. In this respect it surpasses any other process yet discovered. In order to apply it, we place the diluted prussic acid in a watch-glass, and invert oA'^er


[365/1290 b21964944_0365.jp2]

DETECTION OF THE VAPOUR IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS. 301 it another watch-glass, holding in its centre one drop of the bisulphide of ammonium. No change apparently takes place in the sulphide ; but if the Avatch-glass is removed after the lapse of from half a minute to ten minutes, according to the quantity and strength of the prussic acid present, crystallized sulphocyanate of ammonia will be obtained on gently evaporating the liquid to dryness. With an acid of from three to five per cent, the action is completed in ten seconds. The addition of one drop <(f the neutral persulphate of iron (free from nitric acid), to the dried residue, brings out the blood-red colour in- stantly, which is intense in proportion to the quantity of sulphocyanate present. Such is the simple method of employing the vapour test. When the prussic acid is much diluted, the warmth of the hand may serve to expedite the evolution of the vapour. I have elsewhere made some remarks on the application of this process for the detection of prussic acid. (See ' Med. Gaz. 1847.' vol. 39, p. 7G5.) Prussic Acid in Organic Liquids. Detection by Vapour without Distillation. —The organic liquid may be placed in a Avide-mouthed bottle, to which a watch-glass has been previously fitted as a cover. The capacity of the bottle may be such as to allow the surface of the liquid to be within one or two inches of the concave surface of the watch-glass. The solution of Nitrate of silver is then used as a trial-test in the way already described. If the 1-200th of a grain of prussic acid is present, and not too largely diluted, it will be de- tected (at a temperature of 60^) by the drop of nitrate of silver being converted into an opaque white or crystalline film of cyanide of silver, the chemical change commencing at the margin. We may then substitute for the nitrate of silver the bisulphide of ammonium, and proceed in the manner above described. It may be sometimes necessary to place the bottle in a basin of warm water. If the solution of silver is tarnished by sulphuretted hydrogen, as a result of putre- foction, the sulphur-test alone should be used. By this process I have detected prussic acid in the stomach of a person poisoned by it, as late as twelve days after death. After the stomach had been exposed for a few days longer, all traces of the poison had disappeared. Detection by Distillation.—This process was originally suggested by Las- saigne. The organic liquid should be distilled in a water-bath, at 212°, and about one-sixth or one-eighth of the contents of the retort, collected in a re- ceiver kept cool by water. The tests may now be applied to the distilled liquid. If the trial-tests indicate that the quantity of poison is small, a solu- tion of nitrate of silver or caustic potash may be placed in the receiver, to fix the acid as it is distilled over; Prussian blue may then be procured in the manner described, or the vapour may be at once absorbed by bisulphide of ammonium in the receiver, and the liquid evaporated to obtain sulphocyanate. Prussic acid has been foimd in the stomach by distillation, so late as seven days after death, although the odour could not be perceived before distillation. In the case of Montgomery (Report of trial of Thompson, Glasgow Circuit Court, 1857, by Hugh Cowan, pp. 9 and 53), the deceased died in about fifty minutes after having taken two drachms of prussic acid (equivalent to three and a quarter grains of anhydrous acid). The death took place on the 13th September : the body was buried on the 17th, and exhumed on the 30th. The parts removed were then put into stoppered bottles, and on the 5th October the Drs. McKinlay detected prussic acid doubtfully by the odour, but distinctly by the three tests, in the stomach, before distillation, as well as in the liquid distilled from the stomach and its contents. They did not succeed in detecting its presence in the tissues. About five weeks subsequently to this analysis, the viscera, which had been kept closely secured in glass bottles, were examined by Dr. Maclagan. The heart, kidneys, and intestines gave no indication of the presence of the poison, but it was detected by the sulphur-test, in the form of vapour, in one half of the spleen, although there was no odour of the poison. When the


[366/1290 b21964944_0366.jp2]

302 POISONING BY CYANIDE OF POTASSIUM. viscera containing the poison have undergone putrefaction, no trace of the acid may be found either by its vapour or by distillation. In this case it may have been converted into sulphocyanate of ammonia by the sulphide of am- monium produced during putrefaction. The sulphocyanate may be dissolved out of the dried viscera or liquids by alcohol, and the solution evaporated to dryness and tested by a pers:dt of iron. Much is lost by reason of the great volatility of the acid. I have found the vapour to traverse wet and dry bladder in a few minutes. Hence all viscera suspected to contain prussic acid should be preserved in well-stoppered bottles. Jn the Tissues.—Soon after death the poison may be easily detected in the blood, secretions, or any of the soft organs, by placing them in a bottle, and collecting the vapour in the manner already described. This will be found to be far more convenient and satisfactory than the process by distillation. In the case of a dog poisoned by a large dose of prussic acid, Mr. Hicks brought to me the stomach after it had been exposed twenty-four hours, and thoroughly washed under a current of water, and yet the poison was readily detected by placing the whole organ in a bottle, and absorbing the vapour by nitrate of silver. This shows how completely the animal tissues at death are penetrated by prussic acid, and how firmly for a time it is retained by them. The poison has been thus discovered, in experiments on animals, in the blood and in the serous exhalation of the chest. Cyanide of Potassium. Symptoms.—This salt has a bitter taste, producing first a sense of coldness on the tongue, followed by a feeling of constriction, and burning heat, in the throat. It is one of the most formidable poisons known to chemists. It has destroyed life in a quarter of an hour. A dose of five grains has proved fatal in three instances. In one case the person died in two hours. (' Chem. News,' Sept. 5, 1863.) The symptoms which the cyanide produces are similar to those occasioned by prussic acid:—insensibility, spasmodic respiration, con- vulsions, with tetanic stiffness of the jaws and body. They appear in a few seconds or minutes, and run through their course with great rapidity. Insensibility is not always an immediate symptom. A woman, who at the time was under medical treatment, took by mistake a teaspoonful of a solution of cyanide of potassimu, this quantity containing about seven grains of the salt. Immediately after taking it she complained of a severe burning pain in the stomach, and a feeling as if the bowels were about to act. She went to the water-closet, and her strength left her. She was removed to bed, and speedily became imconscious. It was found impossible to introduce anything into the stomach. She died in less than an hour. There was no convulsion before death, but a sudden convulsive action of the body took place after the heart had ceased to beat. The appearance of the body was so natural, even on the day following death, that some of her friends supposed there might still be life. ('Boston Medical and Surgical Journal,' Dec. 11, 1856, and 'Brit, and For. Med. Rev.,' 1857, vol. 19, p. 498.) In June 1856, a woman swallowed an ounce and a half of a solution of cyanide of potassium, used for photographic purposes. The quantity taken amounted to five grains. In two minutes she became unconscious, the whole of the body was slightly convulsed, and the pupils of the eyes were dilated. She foamed at the mouth, the pulse was small and feeble, and there was spasmodic closure of the jaws. Nevertheless as she had lost some teeth, there was sufficient space for the introduction of the tube of the stomach-pump, within five minutes after she had taken the poison. She died in twenty minutes. In the Registrar General's Report for Oct. 3 1857 three deaths are stated to have occurred from this salt, amon"- the fixniilies of soldiers : two were cases of suicide and one of accident. It appears that they


[367/1290 b21964944_0367.jp2]

SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES. ANALYSIS. 303 employ it for cleaning lace. (For other cases of its fatal action see ' Med. Times and Gaz ,' Oct. 12, 1850, p. 390 ; Nov. 9, 1850, p. 482; and July 12, 1851, p. 41; also, ' Chera. Ncavs,' April 27, 1861, p. 2G0.) The salt is much used by photographers, and has given rise to many accidents among persons engaged in the practice of this art. Appearances.—In a case in which an inspection of the body was made two days after death, there was no remarkable odour :—the muscles were stiff and rigid; the face, and fore part of the trunk, pale; the back part livid, except those portions which had sustained pressure. The fingers and toes were con- vulsively bent inwards, the nails blue, eyelids half-closed, lips pale, the vessels of the brain filled with blueish-red (blaurothem) blood. On making a section of the brain and spinal marrow, bloody points were observed. The lungs were congested posteriorly, and on cutting into them, a strong odour of bitter almonds was perceived. A yellowish mucus was found in the stomach, which yielded on analysis cyanide of potassium. The mvicous membrane was reddened near the intestinal end. The poison was not detected in any part of the body ex- cept the contents of the stomach and intestines. ' Casper's Wochenschrift,' Oct. 4, 1845, 657.) In Nov. 1851, a girl, set. 18, was brought to Guy's Hos- pital. Half an liour before her admission, she was seen to swallow a solution of cyanide of potassium. She vomited once. It is stated that she was alive when put into the cab, but when taken out at the hospital seven minutes after- wards, she was completely insensible, pulseless at the wrist, and to all appear- ance dead. Artificial respiration was at once resorted to, ammonia was applied to the nostrils, Avarmth to the extremities, and cold affusion to the spine; but all to no effect, and with the exception of an alteration in the pupils observed during the first few minutes of her admission, she evinced no sign of vitality. The body was inspected on the following day. The stomach contained a large quantity of half-digested food: its mucous membrane was of a pink colour and deeply injected, especially in patches. Every other organ was healthy, and there was no appearance of corrosion about the mouth. The contents of the stomach were of a pale straw colour, semi-fluid, and had a decidedly bitter almond odour. Prussic acid was detected in them. See also a case by Dr. Ellis, ' Lancet,' Oct. 17, 1863, p. 447. This poison is generally ftital. A rare instance of recovery was communi- cated to me by Mr. Taafe, of Brighton. In March, 1862, a man swallowed the greater part of a solution containing an ounce of the commercial cyanide, which he had dissolved for the purpose. Mr. Taafe found the man a few minutes afterwards lying in the street insensible, and breathing stertorously; and in about ten minutes he applied the stomach-pump with cold affusion freely. In two hours the man vomited, and from that time rapidly recovered. Cyanide of potassium has a local chemical action upon the skin ; and if this is abraded or wounded, it may be absorbed and produce serious effects. Some accidents of this kind have occurred in the practice of photography. ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 1863, vol. 1, p. 454.) ^/<a(ys?s.—Cyanide of potassium is usually seen in hard white masses. It is deliquescent, and very soluble in water: the solution, when pure, is colourless, and has a strong alkaline reaction, a soapy feel, and a powerful odour of prussic acid. It is not very soluble in pure and strong alcohol. 1. It is decomposed by all acids, and prussic acid is set free. 2. The potash is precipitated by tartaric acid and chloride of platinum. 3. It gives a Avhite precipitate with nitrate of silver, which, when dried and heated, possesses all the properties of cyanide of silver (ante, p. 299). This precipitate is easily redissolved by a slight excess of the solution of cyanide of potassium. 4. If a solution of proto-sulphate of iron is added to a solution of the cyanide of potassium, and aflei" agitation diluted sulphuric acid, Prussian blue will result.


[368/1290 b21964944_0368.jp2]

POISONING BY OIL OF BITTER ALMONDS. 304 5. A single grain of tliis salt moistened with water in a Avatcli-glass, gives a Avell- marked reaction, by its vapour, with the silver and sulphur tests. Should tliis experiment fail, a drop of the bisulphide of ammonium may be heated with the cyanide—the liquid acidulated with hydrochloric acid, and a solution of per- sulphate of iron added. The red colour of the sulphocyanate of iron is imme- diately brought out. Organic Substances.—The salt may be obtained as a soluble fixed residue from organic matter by drying and incinerating it in close vessels ; or prussic acid may be at once procured by distilling the contents of the stomach with diluted sulphuric acid. Essential Oil of Bitter Almonds. This liquid, which is used for the purpose of giving flavour and odour to con- fectionery, owes its poisonous properties chiefly to the presence of prussic acid. It contains a variable quantity of the poison, but this has been found in it in a proportion of twelve per cent. Almo7id flavour or essence of peach kernels contains one drachm of the essential oil to seven drachms of rectified spirits. Symptoms.—The following may be taken as a summary: lividity of the fiice; eyes glassy, prominent, fixed and staring ; pupils dilated and insensible to light; jaws spasmodically closed ; frothy mucus about the mouth ; in some cases, vomiting of food; coldness of the skin ; heaving and intermittent i-espiration, sometimes stertorous; absence of the pulse; head spasmodically drawn backwards, and sometimes the trunk ; general relaxation of the limbs; an odour of bitter almonds about the mouth. In a case, the particulars of which were communicated to me by Dr. Bull of Hereford, a woman swallowed about seventeen drops of the essential oil, ■ and she died in half an hour. She was seen by Dr. Bull in about fift;een minutes: her face Avas livid; the lips were separated; the teeth clenched; there was froth about the mouth; the eyes were half-shut and glassy; the pupils dilated and fixed; there were heavings of the chest at intervals; there was no pulse, and the action of the heart was scarcely perceptible. No odour was perceived about the body until after the stomach-pump had been used. Tlie first symptoms observed in this case were strong convulsions, the deceased throwing her arms about as if in pain. A boy, ajt. 13, swallowed a quantity of the oil; he was found lying on the floor motionless and insensible ; his face pale; his eyes open and fixed, the pupils dilated, and he was rolling and panting for breath; the pulse at the wrist was imperceptible ; he died in a quarter of an hour without any convulsions appearing. A man, set. 20, swallowed about two ounces of the oil. A person pi-esent saw him fall suddenly while in the act of swallowing, he made a loud ciy, gave one deep expiration, and died. In another case, a woman, set. 46, who had been in the habit of using the almond essence for flavouring confectionery, swallowed about half an ounce (thirty drops of the oil). She died in less than half an hour. When seen by a medical man ten minutes after she had taken the poison, she was perfectly insensible. The face was pale but swollen, and covered Avith perspiration; the eyes stared fixedly as if in terror; the pupils were dilated. The lips were partly closed and livid, and a frothy mucus issued from the mouth. The lower jaw was firmly contracted, while the muscles of the neck and of the limbs, excepting those of the fingers, Avere flaccid. She breathed slowly and heavily, making about ten respirations in a minute ; the pulse Avas from 30 to 40, and feeble. There was an odour of bitter almonds in the breath. Some blood which Avas drawn from the arm was thick and dark, resembling choleraic blood. In spite of the use of the stomach pump and cold aff"usion the patient did not shoAv any signs of recovery, but gradually sank (' Assoc' Med. Jour. Dec. 13, 1856, p. 1055.)


[369/1290 b21964944_0369.jp2]

OIL OF BITTER ALMONDS. APPEARANCES. ANALYSIS. 305 In March, 1853, a woman, aet. 39, swallowed half an ounce of almond flavour, containing half a drachm of the essential oil. In ten minutes she was seen by Mr. Phillips, avIio found her perfectly insensible and motionless; the pupils were moderately dilated and insensible to light; the mouth was j^artly open, the lips were pale, there was no distortion or spasmodic movement of the features; the pulse was slightly tremulous, and entirely ceased in a few minutes; the breathing was slightly stertorous, and took place at long intervals. She continued in this state for twenty minutes without any convulsive move- ments of the body, when she died, i.e. half an hour after she had taken the poison. In another case two drachms destroyed life in seventeen minutes. ('Lancet,' Oct. 17, 18G3, p. 447.) Appearances.—In Dr. Bull's case (supra), on inspection nine hours after death no odour of almonds was perceptible in the chest, head, or heart, nor in the venous blood with which the system was gorged. The lungs and heai-t were healthy. The vessels of the brain were congested, and there was a general effusion of serum on the hemispheres. The lining membrane of the stomach was much congested. On opening it the bitter-almond odour was quite perceptible. (See ' Prov. Med. Jour.' Sept. 11, 1844, p. 3G4.) In the case of the boy (s?/pra), which proved fatal in a quarter of an hour, on inspection there was pallor of the face, with lividity of the depending parts; the lungs were congested; the odour of the poison was perceptible only in the abdomen, and very distinctly in the contents of the stomach. The mucous coat of this organ was generally pale, but there Avere some patches of ecchy- mosis scattered over it. The essential oil and prussic acid were detected in it. (' Lancet,' July 12, 1845, p. 40.) In a case which proved fatal in three hours, the skin was partially livid, the blood fluid, and the membranes of the brain as well as the lungs were gorged. The contents of the stomach had a strong smell of the oil, and the mucous coat towards the intestinal opening had a red appearance. The other organs were healthy. The blood, with which the A^enous system is gorged, is generally liquid and of a dark colour. Anah/sis.—The essential oil, which is often called peach-nut oil, is colour- less Avhen pure, but it commonly has a pale yellow colour, and a strong odour of bitter almonds, by which it may be at once identified. It has a hot, burning taste, and a feebly acid reaction. It produces, when dropped on paper, a greasy stain which does not entirely disappear by the application of heat. It has a sp. gi-. of r043 ; it sinks in water, which dissolves about one-thirtieth part. It is soluble in alcohol and ether in all proportions. When mixed with a few drops of strong sulplnu-ic acid, it forms a rich crimson-red liquid which, if exposed to air, acquires a yellow colour. When poured into cold water, the crimson liquid is immediately destroyed, and a yellow colouring matter falls in globules. The smell arid taste of this oil arc sufficient for its identifica- tion ; but nitrobenzole possesses the same odour, and has been mistaken for it. The vapour of prussic acid does not so readily escape from this oil as from the watery solution : hence the vapour-tests do not give the same charac- teristic results. Tests. 1. Add to one or two drops of the oil a like quantify of bisulphide of ammonium. Mere mixture at a low temperature only pro- duces sulphocyanate after standing ten minutes or longer: but if the liquid is warmed to 100°, the conversion is immediate, and the change is indicated by the blood-red colour .struck on adding to the liquid persulphate of iron. If any unchanged sulphide should give a black colour, this may be removed by the addition of one or two drops of hydrochloric acid. 2. Dissolve one or two drops of the oil in alcohol and add to the mixture a few drops of a solution of potash, followed by a solution of green sulphate of iron and hydro- chloric acid. P:-ussian blue is formed on agitating the mixture, but it does not appear until the precipitated oxide of iron is dissolved by the addition of X


[370/1290 b21964944_0370.jp2]

306 NARCOTIC VAPOUES. SULrillDE OF CARBON. diluted sulphviric or hydrochloric acid. The silver-test is inapplicable to the oil in its ordinary stiite. The vapour of the oil produces no change in a drop of a solution ol' nitrate of silver, except after long exposure. If, however, the oil be heated, there is an immediate production of cyanide of silver. Ihe two tests above mentioned are sufficient for all practical purposes. Bitter almond water, laurel water, and the essences of peach and cherry kernels, owe their noxious properties to the presence of prussic acid. CHAPTER 26. narcotic liquids and vapours—sulphide of carbon—coal-naphtha wood- naphtha amylene—fusel-oil. amylic alcohol—benzole — nitrobenzole aniline oil of wormwood nitroglycerine or glonoine. Sulphide of Carbon. This liquid is extensively used in the arts as a solvent for phosphorus, sulphur, and caoutchouc. Nothing is known of its effects on man as a liquid ; and from its powerful and offensive odour it could not be readily administered with homicidal intention. The effects of its vapour have been chiefly observed among workers who employ this liquid. It produces head- ache, loss of appetite, impairment of vision and hearing, and causes general derangement of health, evidently by an operation on the nervous system. (See ' Chem. News,' May 2, 18G3, p. 216.) Analysis.—The odour of this liquid is sufficient to identify it even in the smallest quantity. Coal Naphtha. The light oily product of the distillation of coal, knoAvn under the name of naphtha, and chemically described as a hydrocarbon, has caused death in one case, iinder symptoms of narcotic poisoning. A boy, vzt. 12, swallowed inadvertently about three ounces of naphtha, in the state in which it is used for lamps. He soon appeared as if intoxicated, and ran about in a wild delirium. When seen in a short time by a medical man, he was insensible—in a state of collapse—breathing stertorously, and hia skin was cold and clammy. He had already vomited part of the liquid, and the odour of the vomited matter at once showed that he had taken coal naphtha. By the promotion of vomiting, he was made to eject altogether two table- spoonfuls of naphtha, and he partially recovered. In spite of this reaction, however, in about two hours he was again in a state of collapse, insensible, pulseless, gasping for breath, and frothing at the mouth. The eyes were fixed and glassy, and the pupils contracted. There was complete loss of muscular power, and great difficulty of breathing, but no convulsions. He had lost the power of swallowing. In spite of every effort to save him, he died in less than three hours after swallowing the liquid. On inspection of the body four days after death, a strong smell of naphtha was perceived throughout the tissues. The blood was fluid, there Avas slight effusion of serum in the ventricles of the brain. The right side of the heart contained fluid blood, the left was empty, the lungs were not congested, but pale. The coats of the stomach were not inflamed or materially changed in appearance. This organ contained a pint of semifiuid matter, of which four or five ounces were liquid. An ounce of a dark-coloured liquid floated on the top, and Avas easily skimmed off. This was found to be naphtha by its lightness, its insolubility in water, and by its inflammability. It burnt with a thick smoky flame. The liquid appeared to act in this case as a pure narcotic. There were no


[371/1290 b21964944_0371.jp2]

307 COAL NAPHTHA. WOOD NAPIITIIA. FUSEL OIL. convulsions. The respiration of the vapour of this liquid diluted with air produces headache, giddiness, severe pain in the stomach, loss of apipetite and general illness. (' Lancet,' Aug. 23, 185G, p. 230.) Analysis.—The peculiar odour as well as inflammability of the liquid, and the fact that it burns with a bright yellow smoky flame, would be sufficient to identify coal-naphtha. Its lightness and insolubility in Avater would, as in the case above mentioned, allow of its being readily separated from the aqueous contents of the stomach. Wood-Naphtha. Wood Spirit. The term Naphtha is frequently applied to a product of the destructive distillation of Avood, differing entirely in composition and properties from the hydrocarbon above described as coal-naphtlia. It is also known under the names of methyl alcohol and pyroligneous ether. It difi'ers from coal- naphtha, among other properties, in being niiscible with and soluble in water, in all proportions. It is a nauseous liquid in odour and taste. When mixed in the proportion of one-tenth part with rectified spirit, it forms a compound now largely employed as a solvent in the arts and medicine under the name of Methylated spirit. It has a hot disagreeable spirituous taste, and like Methylated spirit it would no doubt operate as a narcotic poison. Its odour is so powerful and peculiar, that no one could swallow it unknowingly. I have not met with an instance of the effects of this hquid on man ; but I have seen the effects produced by the respiration of its vapour on a large scale. It causes headache, loss of appetite, nausea, sickness, languor, and a general feeling of illness. Analysis.—It is one of the mo.st inflammable of liquids, burning with a pale blue flame. It is light and volatile, readily separable from other liquids by distillation below 200°. Its odour is pecvdiar. It mixes with Avater and alcohol in all proportions. Alcohol containing one-tenth part of it is rendered so nauseous that it cannot be used for the purposes of drinking. Amylene. The vapour of this liquid was introduced by the late Dr. Snow as a substi- tute for the vapour of chloroform. It produces a loss of sensibility without causing complete coma or stupor. It use has already led to at least two deaths; and it is not so safe an agent as chloroform vapour for surgical purposes. The only appearance met with in one fatal case, Avas an emphyse- matous state of the lungs or excessive dilatation of the air-cells ('Med. Times and Gazette,' April 4 and 18, 1857, pp. 332, 381); and in the other, a distension of the right cavities of the heart with daik fluid blood. There was no congestion of the brain, and no smell of amylene perceptible in the body. (' Med. Times and Gazette,' Aug. 8, 1857 p. 133.) Fusel Oil. Amylic Alcohol. This liquid is also known under the name of Potato-spirit or oil of grain. It is of an alcoholic nature, but less volatile than alcohol and ether: hence it is commonly a product at the latter part of the distillation of spirit from fermented potatoes and cereal grains, imparting a disagreeable odour and taste to the brandies produced. Its vapour when respired in a diluted state is irritating to the lungs; it produces headache, nausea, and a feeling of giddiness, with a sense of suffocation and inability to stand or Avalk. Dr. Furst, of Berlin, found that tAVO drachms of the liquid thrown into the stomach of a rabbit, caused great restlessness and loss of muscular power; but the animal soon recovered. A similar quantity killed another rabbit in about two hours: the principal symptoms Averc great depression and diffi- X 2


[372/1290 b21964944_0372.jp2]

308 NARCOTIC VArOURS. BENZOLE. IsITROBEXZOLE, culty of breathing. On inspection of the body, there was extravasation of dark broAvn blood at the gullet end of the stonnach, and the mucous membrane presented brownish red points. The lining membrane of the duodenum and upper part of the small intestines, was reddened and filled with mucus, the kidneys were healthy and bloodless, and the lungs somewhat redder than natural. Three drachms killed a rabbit within an hour. Half an ounce caused death in a quarter of an hour, and one ounce in four minutes. Fusel oil, as a liquid, appears to have at first a stimulating and afterwards a depressing action. In small (piantities it produces intoxication. (See 'London Med. Gaz.' vol. 35, p. 4:50.) This liquid is absorbed into the blood, and after a time, may be detected by its peculiar odour in the breath. Its toxicological effects are more potent in the state of vapour than when taken as a liqiiid into the stomach. Analysis.—Fusel oil is a volatile liquid of a pale yellow colour, lighter than water and only sparingly soluble in it. It is dissolved by alcohol and ether in all proportions, but not readily by chloroform. Water separates it from its ethereal solution. It has a hot burning taste and an offensive spiritvious odour, which is very persistent and peculiar: by this it may be distinguished from other alcoholic liquids. It is inflammable and burns with a pale blueish flame. Like alcohol, ether, and wood-spirit, it decomposes chromic acid, producing green oxide of chromium. In organic mixtures ether might be used for its separation. By distilling one part of fusel oil Avith two parts of acetate of potash and one part of oil of vitriol, an ethereal liquid is produced which is used in confectionery ixnder the name of Essence of Jarcjonelle Pear. A child on two occasions became partially comatose and had livid lips and a feeble pulse, afler eating some confectioneiy which it Avas calculated contained about one drop of this essence. Hence its use is not without danger. (See ' Pharm. Jour.' Nov. 1851, p. 214.) Benzole. This is a colourless volatile liquid, hydrocarbon obtained by the distillation and rectification of coal naphtha. The respiration of its vapour produces i narcotic effects, but with some symptoms indicative of a noxious action on the • brain and spinal marrow, e.g. noises in the head, convulsive trembling, twitch- ■ ings of the muscles, convulsions, Avith difficulty of breathing. (See paper by • Dr. Stone, ' Medical Gazette,' 1848, vol. 41, p. 1077.) But little is knoAvn concerning the action of liquid benzole on the human subject. It is poisonous to the loAver animals and to all pai-asites; and it has been suggested by Dr. Sonnenkalb as a remedy for destroying the trichina spiralis (p. 278). This Avriter also refers to a case in Avhich a quantity of liquid benzole Avas sAval- lowed by a man, and it operated as a narcotic. (Anilin und Anilin-farben, Leipzig, 1864, p. 13.) Analysis.—The odour and inflammability of the liquid, as well as its in- solubility in Avater, are sufficient to identity it, and to alloAV of its separation from organic liquids. NiTROBENZOLE. _ This liquid, Avhich is noAv largely employed as a substitute for the essential oil of bitter almonds in perfumery and confectionery, has noAv taken its place among narcotic poisons. In the second edition of my work on Poisons (1859) some experiments Avere quoted from the ' Lancet' (Jan. 10,1857, p. 40), shoAV- jng that one drachm of nitrobenzole killed a rabbit almost instantaneously; and half a drachm mixed Avith tAvo drachms of water rendered a cat insensible for several minutes, a slimy mucus floAving from its mouth for several hours after- wards. The animal refused all food, and died in tAventy-four hours. (' On


[373/1290 b21964944_0373.jp2]

SYMPTOxMS PRODUCED BY N1TR0I3ENZ0LE. 309 Poisons,' 1859, p. 701.) In 1859, the late Professor Casper, of Berlin, pub- lished an account of this liquid under the name of'A new Poison' ('Viertel- jalirschrift,' B. 16, p. 1.) Its effects on a rabbit and a dog are here described. Two drachms of it were given to a rabbit Avithout any symptoms being pro- duced ; two drachma were then given to the animal at intervals of ten minutes or a quarter of an hour until the rabbit had taken one omice. In a minute and a half after the last dose, the animal fell suddenly on its left side. The pupils Avere dilated, while the limbs and tail were strongly convulsed. The animal died in a minute. The dose was probably unnecessarily large, but the result shows that nitrobenzole in a large dose destroys life rapidly. On open- ing the body, the powerful odour of the liquid was everywhere perceptible, even in the blood. This odour remained strongly in the body when it was again examined fourteen days after death. Twenty cubic centimeters (about live drachms) given to a middle-sized dog produced no remarkable symptoms. After some hours the animal was observed to be dull and languid : in twelve hours there was profound coma with slow respiration and coldness of the skin : but there were no convulsions. The animal was then killed. All the solids and liquids of the body, including the blood, had a strong odour of the poison; and some drops of the oily liquid were separated from the contents of the stomach. The fluid on which it floated had a strong alkaline reaction. The blood retained the odour for several days. Passing from experiments on animals to the effects produced on man, the following cases are of interest: they tend to show that, as in the action of chlorolbrm and fused oil, the vapour is much more potent than the liquid. Mr. Nicholson ('Lancet,' Feb. 1, 1862, p. 135), in referring to one fatal case of poisoning by the liquid, states that he has known several instances in which the vapour, as it is evolved from almond glycerine soap, has seriously affected females. A friend of his who used a cake of the soap in taking a ■warm bath fainted from the effect of the vapour of nitrobenzole set free, and ■was ill for some time afterwards. In July, 1863, ]\Ir. Fotherby communicated to me a case of poisoning by this compound, in which the symptoms so closely resembled those of the essential oil of bitter almonds, that it Avas at first sup- posed this oil had been taken. A woman, get. 30, tasted a liquid which had been used for flavouring pastiy, and perceiving that it was very acrid on her tongue and lips, spat it out inmiediately and washed her mouth with water. She thought she could not have swallowed more than a drop, but in replacing the bottle she spilled about a tablespoonful on the table and did not imme- diately wipe it up. The vapour strongly impregnated the small room in which she was, and produced a feeling of sickness in another servant. The burning taste in the mouth Avas immediately followed by a sensation of numbness and tingling in the tongue and lips, and a strange feeling for the next hour. As the Avoman became Avorse, Mr. Fotherby Avas called in, and saAv her in an hour and three-quarters after the occurrence. Her aspect Avas then quite typical of prussic acid poisoning;—the eyes were bright and glassy, the features pale and ghastly, the lips and nails purple, as if stained by blackberries, the skin Avas clammy, and the pulse feeble. Her mind Avas then clear, and she described how the accident had occurred and Avhat her sensations were. She Avas able to swallow a mustard emetic, after which she became rapidly worse, lost her consciousness, the teeth became set, the hands clenched and blue, the muscles rigid and convulsed. She vomited freely a pale fluid matter Avhich had the peculiar odour of nitrobenzole. The stomach-pump Avas used but the fluid ■w ashed out of the organ had hardly any odour, OAving probably to the small quan- tity actually sAvalloAved, and its removal by absorption. The breathing became much reduced, and the pulse could scarcely be felt. In about eleven hours there was reaction, consciouisness returned, and she was able to SAvalloAV. At


[374/1290 b21964944_0374.jp2]

POISONING BY NITHOBEXZOLE. 310 the end of seventeen hours she was much better; but she then complained of distorted vision, with flashes of light and strange colours before her eyes. For some weeks she continued weak. It was at first supposed the woman had swal- lowed a larger quantity of the liquid than she had imagined ; but it is obvious, from the entire absence of the odour in the fluid drawn off by the stomach- pump, within about two hours, that but little could have passed into the stomach. There is no doubt, from what has been observed in other cases, that these severe symptoms were chiefly due to the breathing of the vapoiu- m a concentrated form. A fellow-servant who was in the room at the time the nitrobenzole was spilled, also suffered from the inhalation of the vapour. Mr. Fotherby sent me a portion of the liquid, and I found it to be pure nitro- benzole unmixed with any essential oil of almonds. A case of poisoning by this liquid which was the subject of an inquest at Kamsey, in the Isle of Man, is reported in the ' Pharmaceutical Journal' for December 1862, p. 283. A clerk in some chemical works took, on the Gth of November, a few drops (supposed to have been fifteen) of nitrobenzole. Immediately afterwards he felt unwell and became insensible. Stimulants restored consciousness, but there Avas a relapse, and he died the next day. The following case occun-ed at the London Hospital:—A boy, ait. 17, while drawing off" some nitrobenzole by a siphon, swallowed a portion of the liquid. There were no immediate symptoms, but he soon felt sleepy, and when at dinner ate but little, and said he felt as if he was drunk. This was between two and three hours after he had swallowed the liquid. He fell into a stupor which became deeper and deeper until death took place, without vomiting or convulsions, twelve hours after the ingestion of the poison. (Dr. Mackenzie in ' Med. Times and Gaz.,' 1862, vol. 1, p. 239.) In a paper communicated to the Royal Society in 1863, Dr. Letheby describes this and another case which fell under his observation,—that of a man, a3t. 43, who spilled a quantity of nitrobenzole over his clothes, and went about several hours, breathing an atmosphere saturated with the vapour. The effects were nearly the same in both cases; although in one the poison was inhaled in vapour, and in the other it was swallowed as a liquid. For some time there was no feeling of drowsiness in this man ; gradually, how- ever, his face became flushed, his expression stupid, and his gait unsteady ; he had the appearance of a person who had been drinking. The stupor gi-adually increased, until it passed into profound coma, and in this state he died. The progress of each of the fatal cases was much the same as that of slow intoxication, excepting that the mind was perfectly clear, until the coming on of the fatal coma. This was sudden, like a fit of apoplexy; and from that moment there was no return of consciousness or bodily power : the sufferer lay as if in a deep sleep, and died Avithout a struggle. The duration of each case was nearly the same. About four hours elapsed from the time of taking or inhaling the poison to the setting-in of the coma, and the coma lasted five hours. The appearances after death were—flushed fiice, livid lips, the super- ficial vessels of the body, especially about the throat and arms, Avere gorged with blood, Avhich was everywhere black, and fluid. The dependent parts were turgid, the lungs somewhat congested ; the cavities of the heart Avere full of blood; the liver Avas of a purple colour, and the gall-bladder distended Avith bile ; the brain and its membranes were congested, and in the case of the man there Avas much bloody serosity in the ventricles. Nitrobenzole, as well as aniline, into which it appears to be pai-tially converted in the body, Avas detected in the brain and stomach. ('Proc. Eoyal Soc. 1863,' No. 56, p. 550.) It IS not stated what the result of the analysis, if any, Avas in reference to the case of death from the vapour, in Avhich the poison was absorbed through the lungs. In performing some experiments on animals, Dr. Letheby found that


[375/1290 b21964944_0375.jp2]

311 NITROBENZOLE. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. the local action on the stomach was slight; there Avas rarely any vomiting, and there was either rapid coma, or a slow setting-in of paralysis and coma, after a long period of inaction. There was a complete loss of vokmtary power, a spasmodic fixing of the muscles of the back, with violent struggles, a look of distress, and occasionally a kind of epileptic fit. The pupils were Avidely dilated, the action of the heart was in-egular, and the breathing difficult. The time of death in the more rapid cases varied from twenty-five minutes to twelve hours after the administration of the poison. In other experiments, in which smaller doses were given, the time that elapsed between the ad- ministration of the poison and the coming-on of the first symptoms (an epileptic fit), varied from nineteen to seventy-two hours; in most cases it was about two days, and the time of death was from four to nine days. The appearances were similar to those already described. When death had taken place within twenty-four hours, the odour of the nitrobenzole was clearly perceptible in the stomach, brain, and lungs; and aniline (from the chemical conversion of nitrobenzole) was found in the organs. In the slower fiital cases the odour had ofi;en entirely disappeared : but traces of aniline could be detected in the brain and urine, and sometimes in the stomach and liver. Occasionally no poison was found, although death had taken place from the poison ! This narcotic compound differs from the ordinary narcotics in its powerful and persistent odour, which woidd render it difficult for a person to administer it, either in liquid or vapour, unknowingly to another; in the production of profound coma at an uncertain interval after the stupor; and in the rapidly- latal effects when coma has followed. It operates powerfully as a poison in vapour as well as in a liquid state; but so far as cases have yet been observed in the human .subject, the symptoms resembling those of the first stage of nar- cotic poisoning have very soon appeared. The rapidly-fatal cases only would be likely to be mistaken for apoplexy, but in these the poison would be de- tected by its odour. Analysis.—Nitrobenzole or Essence of Mirbane is a pale lemon-coloured liquid of a strong odour resembling that of bitter almonds. It has a pungent hot disagreeable taste. It gives to confectionery the smell but not the plea- sant taste of oil of bitter almonds. It destroys the colour of litmus, and gives a greasy stain to paper, leaving a yellow mark when the stain disappears. It sinks in water, and is partly dissolved, giving to it a yellowish colour. It is soluble in alcohol, ether, and chloroform, but when agitated with water, it is in great part separated from its ethereal and chloroformic solutions. It has no basic qualities; its aqueous solution is not precipitated either by tannic acid or the chloriodide of mercury and potassium. It is highly combustible, burning with a yellow smoky flame. It yields no Prussian blue when mixed with sulphate of iron, alcohol, and potash, and its vapour produces no cyanide of silver in a solution of the nitrate. It is distinguished from all other liquids, excepting the essential oil of almonds, by its odour, and from this oil by the following test:—Pour a few drops of each on a plate and add a drop of strong sulphuric acid. The oil of almonds acquires a rich crimson colour with a yellow border, the nitrobenzole produces no colour. In order to separate it from organic liquids, they may be acidulated with sulphuric acid, and submitted to distillation in an apparatus similar to that which is described at page 208. If any of it exists in a free state, its odour will be sufficient for detecting its presence. If converted into aniline, another process will be required. There is no probability that this liquid will be successfully employed for the pui-poses of murder without the certainty of detection.


[376/1290 b21964944_0376.jp2]

312 SYMI'TOMS OF POISONING BY ANILINE. Aniline. This is a narcotic poison in liquid or vapour resembling nitrobenzole in its toxicological effects. Schuchardt found that a small rabbit was killed by sixty drops in six hours and a quarter, and a large rabbit by one hundred drops in four hours. There was loss of sensibihty with loss of heat, and violent clonic and tonic convulsions ensued which continued until death. From experiments hitherto performed, it does not appear to be an active poison as a liquid, and it seems to affect the spinal marrow more than the brain. It has also a local irritant action. Dr. Turnbull gave half a drachm of the sulphate to a dog. In two hours and a half, the animal vomited, and an hour later it was purged. It became dull, weak, and tremulous; the pulse was rapid, and the breathing laboured. The feet were cold, the hind legs paralyzed, and the tongue was of a blue colour. In five hours the symptoms abated, and the next day the animal had recovered. {' Lancet,' Nov. Ifi, 1861.) Dr. Letheby found that aniline given to dogs and cats in doses of from twenty to sixty drops, caused a rapid loss of voluntary power. The animal staggered and fell upon its side powerless, the head was drawn back, the pupils were dilated, the breathing was difficult, and the action of the heart tumultuous; there were slight twitchings or spasms of the muscles, and the animal quickly passed into a state of coma, from which it did not recover, death taking place in from half an hour to thirty-two hours. On inspection, the brain and its membranes were congested, the cavities of the heart were nearly full of blood, and the lungs but slightly congested. The blood all over the body was black and coagulated. The poison was easily discovered in the brain, the stomach, and the liver, although it was found that, as nitrobenzole is changed into aniline, so in some cases aniline and its salts are converted into mauve or magenta. This arises from the oxidation of the salts, and it has been especially observed on the surface of the body. (' Proc. Royal Society,' No. 56, 1863, p. 556). There is no instance recorded of the effects of aniline as a poison on the human body. It is a liquid of nauseous odour and taste, and could hardly be taken or administered without the consciousness of the person taking it. The salts appear to have very little action. They have been used medicinally in large doses without producing any unusual effects. In one case 406 grains of the sulphate of aniline were given to a patient in the London Plospital, in the course of a few days, without any symptoms of poisoning. (Dr. Letheby, loc. cit. See also cases by Dr. Fraser, ' Mod. Times and Gazette,' March 8, 1862, p. 239.) It is difficult to suppose that combination with an acid to form a perfectly soluble salt can render aniline inert, as this would be contrary to experience in reference to other bases, e. g. nicotina and conia : at the same time, if we except the action of the vapour, no case has occurred which will enable us to solve the question. There are facts which show that the vajmir of aniline, even when much diluted, exerts a poisonous effect on man. Mr. Knaggs met with a case in which a workman accidentally broke a carboy containing a large quantity of this liquid ; the aniline fell over him, but none entered his mouth. In his anxiety to wipe up the aniline, he respired the vapour for some time, felt giddy, and complained of his head and chest. When seen some hours after the accident his face and body Avere of a livid leaden hue, the lips, gums, tongue, and eyes of a corpse-like bluish pallor, he Avas breathing by' gasping, and appeared at the point of death. There was no convulsion ; he was sen- sible, and able to give a correct account of his feelings. Ilis pulse was small and irregular. Under active treatment he recovered. Pharm. Jour.,' July


[377/1290 b21964944_0377.jp2]

ANILINE VAPOUE. ANALYSIS. Dr. Letheby relates the following case :—In June 18G1, a boy, set. 16, was brought into the London Hospital in a semicomatose condition. In scrubbing out an aniline vat he had breathed the vapour; and although he did not suffer pain or discomfort at the time, he was suddenly seiztid with giddiness and insensibility. When brought to the hospital he looked like a person m the last stage of intoxication ; the lace and surface of the body were cold, and the pulse was slow and almost imperceptible, the action of the heart was feeble, and the breathing heavy and laborious. After rallying a little, he complained of pain in his head and giddiness. His face had a purple hue, and his lips, the lining membrane of his mouth, as well as his nails, had a similar purple tint. On the next day the narcotic symptoms had passed away, but he was remarkably blue, and looked like a patient in the last stage of cholera. These cases appear to show that aniline vapoiu- is less poisonous than that of nitrobenzole, and that the symptoms follow more rapidly on the inhalation of the vapour. For a full account of the effects of aniline on animals, I must refer the reader to a pamphlet by Dr. Sonnenkalb of Leipsic, —' Anilin und Anilin-farben in toxikologischer und medicinaljDolizeilicher Beziehung,' Leipzig, 1864, p. 20. The injurious effects to public health likely to arise from the employment of aniline colours in confectionery and cosmetics, are also fully described in this essay. Analysts.—Commercial aniline is an oily liquid of a reddish-brown colour, with a peculiar tariy odour. It produces a volatile greasy stain on paper. It is volatile and combustible, bm-ning with a thick smoky flame. It falls to the bottom of water, and does not readily dissolve in it. It is quite soluble in alcohol and ether, but not in chloroform: in the latter property it differs from nitrobenzole. Diluted sulphuric acid combines with it to produce a white compound which is quite soluble in water. A solution of chloride of lime added to the acid watery Kquid produces a splendid colour of various shades of purple and red. The solution of .sulphate of aniline is not precipitated either by tannic acid or chloriodide of mercury and potassium, but aniline itself in the small quantity in which it is dissolved by water yields like the alkalies a yellow precipitate with arsenio-nitrate of silver. It also reduces completely a solu- tion of chloride of gold—precipitating metallic gold. A minute quantity of aniline may be thus detected. When pure aniline is heated with powdered corrosive sublimate, it produces a rich crimson dye. When present in organic liquids, aniline may be separated by digesting the concentrated liquid in alcohol, mixed with a little diluted sulphuric acid. The alcoholic extract, dis- tilled at a high temperature with a solution of potash, yields aniline in the receiver. This may be tested by the methods above described. Oil of Wormwood. I am indebted to Mr. W. Smith, surgeon to the Chesterfield Hospital, for the report of a case of poisoning by this licjuid, which, so far as I know, is the only instance on record of its noxious effects on man. A druggist's shopman was found early one morning by his master, lying on the floor of the shop, perfectly insensible, convulsed, and foaming at the mouth. As the man had never suffered from fits, and the symptoms were of an alarming character, Mr. Smith was at once sent for. He found him no longer violently convulsed, but insensible; the jaws were clenched, and the pupils dilated. The pulse was weak, slow, and compressible. From time to time he uttered incoherent expressions, and attempted to vomit. With some difficulty Mr. Smith administered to him repeated doses of stimiilants, sal volatile and water, lime water, and an emetic of mustard and sulphate of zinc. Free vomiting ensued, and consciousness partially returned. Artificial


[378/1290 b21964944_0378.jp2]

314 OIL OP WORMWOOD. XITROGLYCERINE. warmth was applied to the limbs, and a little brandy and water given at intervals, with draughts of milk and lime water. He gradually recovered. The matters vomited smelt strongly of oil of wormwood, and the nature of the poison was placed beyond doubt by the discovery of the bottle, with marks on its mouth of the oil having been recently poured out. The druggist stated that at least half an ounce had been taken. From the persistent smell of the oil in the ejected matters, after repeated vomiting, it is probable that this was even less than the real quantity. The man, on recovering, had totally forgotten all the circumstances connected with the case, and persisted in stating that he knew no reason why he should have taken it. It is, however, probable that he imagined himself suffering from worms, and sought relief in an un- usual dose of this oil. (See ' Ann. D'Hyg.' 1863, i. 227.) Nitroglycerine (Glonoine). This is a powerfully explosive liquid, well known to chemists as a substi- tution-compound of the innoxious liquid glycerine, obtained in the process of saponification. It has a sweet aromatic pungent taste, and it is stated that a single drop placed on the tongue produces a painful aching in the back of the head which lasts for some hours. ('Miller's Chemistry,' vol. 3, p. 277.) Mr. Field states that he found one drop of the liquid dissolved in water produced insensibility and other symptoms of narcotic poisoning, (' Chem. News,' Nov. 7, 1863. According to Mr. Merrick, its vapour acts powerfully as a narcotic poison, and even when much diluted with air, it produces intense headache. Other experimentalists have not observed these extraordinary effects, and are inclined to regard it as inert, or at any rate they consider that its narcotic properties have been greatly exaggerated. Some support has been given to this last opinion by the fact, that the liquid has been used by homoeopathists under the name of glonoine, and the effects said to have been produced by infinitesimal doses, are of so marvellous a character, as to justify litter incredulity. Like other liquids described in this chapter, it probably acts most powerfully by its vapour, but further observations of a trustworthy kind are required to determine its potency as a poison. Professor Vrij of Rotterdam has prepared this liquid in large quantities, and has examined its chemical and physiological properties. Sobrcro, who discovered it in 1847, stated that the smallest quantity was sufficient to produce the most violent headache, and he concluded from this that it was a ! powerful poison. Professor Vrij found that the vapour caused intense headache, but that it had no poisonous properties. He gave two drops to a , rabbit, and no symptoms of poisoning were produced. (' Pharm. Journal,' ■ 1855-6, p. 229.) Analysis.—Nitroglycerine is a heavy oily-looking liquid. It is dissolved by Avater, but is insoluble in alcoliol and ether. It explodes violently either by a blow, or by the ap])lication of heat. CHAPTER 27. alcohol — eth er — chloroform — camphor tobacco — nicotina cocculus indicus picrotoxine — darnel seeds calabar bean fungi henbane —l act ucarium—solan um, Alcohol. Sijmptoms.—In general, the symptoms produced by alcohol come on in the course of a few minutes. There is confus-ion of thought, with inability to stand or walk, a tottering gait and giddiness, followed by stupor and coma.


[379/1290 b21964944_0379.jp2]

POISONING BY ALCOHOL. SYMPTOMS. 315 Should the person recover from this stage, vomiting supervenes. The in- sensibility produced by alcohol may not come on vmtil atler a certain period and then suddenly. Dr. Christison met with an instance in which a person fell suddenly into a deep stupor, some time after he had swallowed sixteen ounces of whisky—there were none of the usual premonitory symptoms. In another instance, a person may apparently recover from the first effects,—then suddenly become insensible and die convulsed. There is a ghastly or vacant expression on the features, which are sometimes suffused and bloated, the lips are livid, and the pupils are dilated and fixed ; if they possess the power of contracting under the influence of light, it is a favourable sign. (See case in 'Lancet,' Jan. 27, 1855, p. 89.) The conjunctiva or whites of the eyes are generally much suffused. The breath has an alcoholic odour. The more concentrated the alcohol, the more rapidly are the symptoms induced, and they are also more severe in their character. Diluted alcohol commonly produces a stage of excitement before stupor, while in the action of concentrated alcohol there may be profound coma in a few minutes. The cause of death may be generally traced to congestion of the brain or lungs or both. Alcohol may act as a poison by its vapour. If the concentrated vapour be respired, it will produce the usual effects of intoxication. There is a case on record in which a child two years of age was thrown into an apoplectic stupor by the alcoholic vapour of eau de Cologne. In this manner a child might be destroyed, and no trace of the poison found in the stomach. The symptoms arising from apoplexy, from concussion of the brain, or the effects of opium, have been sometimes mistaken for those of poisoning by alcohol, and persona have been wrongly charged with being drunk. With respect to concussion, a difficulty can arise only in reference to the more ad- vanced stage of poisoning by alcohol, i. e. in which there is profound coma. Intoxication may in general be easily distinguished by the odour of the breath, for so long as the symptoms continue, the alcohol is eliminated by the lungs. If there should be no perceptible odour of any alcoholic liquid, the presumption is that the symptoms are not due to intoxication. When the alcoholic odour is perceptible, the symptoms may still be combined with the effects of apoplexy or concussion—a fact Avhich can be cleared up only by a history of the case, or a careful examination of the head for marks of violence. In poisoning by ojnuin there will be a strong smell of this drug in the breath, the symptoms come on much more gradually, and are marked by drowsiness and stupor, passing into complete lethargy, with general relaxation of the muscles, and inability to walk. In poisoning by alcohol there is either great excitement some time before the stupor, which comes on suddenly, or the person is found in a state of deep coma a few minutes after having taken the poison. In poi- soning by opium the face is pale, and the pupils are contracted:—in poisoning by alcohol the face, especially if there be excitement, is more commonly flushed, and the pupils are generally dilated. Another ftict to be noticed is, that while perfect remissions are rare in poisoning by opium,—in poisoning by alcohol a person frequently recovers his senses and dies sul)sequently. When coma has supervened, the patient may be roused by a loud noise or a violent shock in either case, and it is very difficult under these circumstances to draw a well- marked distinction. The odour of the breath, or an examination of the fluid drawn from the stomach by the pump, may then show which poison has been taken : but the treatment is the same in both cases. Appearances.—The stomach has been foimd intensely congested or inflamed, the nuicous membrane presenting in one case a bright red, and in another a dark red-brown colour. When death has taken place rapidly, there may be a pecuHar odour of spirits in the contents; but this will not be perceived if the quantity taken was small, or many hours have elapsed before the in-


[380/1290 b21964944_0380.jp2]

316 POISONIXG BY ALCOHOL. APPEARANCES. spection is made. The brain and its membranes are found congested, and, in some instances, there is efFusion of blood or serum beneath the inner mem- brane. In a case, observed by Dr. Geoghegan, in which a pint of spirits had been taken, and proved fatal in eight hours, black extravasation was found on the mucous membrane of the stomach; but no trace of alcohol could be de- tected in the contents. (* Dub. Med. Press,' i. 293.) The action of a strong alcoholic liquid on the mucous membrane of the stomach so closely resembles the effects produced by arsenic and otlier irritants, as easily to give rise to the suspicion of mineral irritant poisoning. A drawing in the Museum col- lection of Guy's Hospital, furnishes a good illustration of the local action of alcohol. The whole of the mucous membrane of the stomach is highly corrugated and is of a deep brownish-red colour. Of all the liquids af- fecting the brain, this has the most powerful local action on the stomach. A case of alcoholic poisoning of a child, set. 7, referred to me by Mr. Jackaman, coroner for Ipswich, in July, 18G3, will serve to show the correctness of this remark. A girl was Ibund at four o'clock in the morning lying perfectly in- sensible on the floor. She had had access to some brandy which she had swallowed from a quartern measure found near her quite empty. She had spoken to her mother only ten minutes before, so that the symptoms must have come on very rapidly. She was seen by Mr. Adams four hours after- wards. She was then quite insensible, in a state of profound coma, the skin cold and covered with a clammy perspiration. There had been slight vomit- ing. The child died in twelve hours, without recovering consciousness from the time at Avhicli she was fii-st found. On inspection, there was congestion of the brain and its membranes: the heart and lungs were quite healthy. The mucous membrane of the stomach presented patches of intense redness, and in some places it was thickened and softened; portions of it were detached and hanging loosely in the stomach ; and there were patches of black extrava- sation aliout it, evidently from altered blood. It contained a greenish-coloured liquid, but there was no smell of brandy in it, neither was this perceptible in the breath of the child, four hours afler the alcoholic liquid had been taken. At first it was suspected that arsenic had been administered, but the symptoms were not those of arsenical poisoning, and neither arsenic nor any other metallic irritant was present in the contents of the stomach, but slight traces of the vapour of alcohol Avere detected by the process described below. Analysis.—Wlien a large dose has been taken and the case has proved rapidly fatal, the contents of the stomach may have the odour of alcohol, or of the alcoholic licpiid taken. The odour is not always perceptible, or it may be concealed by other odours. In a case of poisoning by gin, the liciuid drawn from the stomach by the pump in seven hours had no odour. In the case of the child above related, the smell of brandy had entirely disappeared in twelve hours. The whole of the contents or of the suspected liquid should be distilled in a water-bath, with a proper condensing apparatus attached. If the liquid has an acid reaction, it should be first neutralized either by a solution of carbonate of potxish, or soda. The Avatery liquid obtained should be mixed with chloride of calcium or anhydrous sulphate of copper, in sufficient quantity, and submitted to a second distillation in a smalkr retort, in a water-bath. The liquid obtained by the second distilla- tion should be agitated with rather more carbonate of potash than it will dissolve, in a small tube provided with a stopper, and allowed to stand. A stratmu of alcohol, if present, Avill, after a time, float on the surface, and may be drawn off by a pipette and examined. Tests.—1. Alcohol has a hot pun- gent taste, a peculiar odour, and is very volatile. 2. Absorbed in asbestos, it burns with a pale blue flame, which deposits no carbon on white porcelain;


[381/1290 b21964944_0381.jp2]

ALCOHOL. ANALYSIS. EFFECTS OF ETITER. 317 and Avhon burnt in the mouth of an inverted test-tube, containing a few drops of solution of baryta, it produces a well-marked deposit of white carbonate of baryta. Lime water may be substituted for baryta in this experiment. Car- bonic acid and water are the sole products of its combustion. 3. It dissolves camphor. 4. It sets free green oxide of chromium when boiled with a few drops of a saturated solution of bichromate of potash mixed with sulphuric acid. (Dr. Thomson, in ' Monthly Jour. Med. Science,' Dec. 1846, p. 412.) The folloAving method will allow of the detection of a quantity of alcohol too small for separation by the process above mentioned. ^lake a mixture of strong sulphuric acid and a saturated solution of bichromate of potash : moisten with this mixture a few fibres of asbestos, and inclose them in a glass tube connected with the retort or flask in which distillation is carried on. For this purpose a flask and tube similar to those used for the detection of chloroform vaj^ourwill be found serviceable (see page 319). The smallest portionof alcohol- vapour passing over the asbestos, inmiediately renders it green, by converting the chromic acid to oxide of chromium. This may serve as a trial test or for evidence, according to circumstances. The tube may be removed, and the condensed vapour collected for the application of the other tests. Ether and pyroxylic spirit produce a similar result. From lapse of time, the eiFects of treatment, or absorption and elimination, there may be no trace of alcohol in the stomach or intestines, nevertheless the person may have died from the effects. In a case, fatal in eight hours, which occurred to Dr. Geoghegan, no alcohol was found in tht' stomach (p. 316). One cause of failure may sometimes be traced to the distillation being restricted to a portion of the contents. It is advisable to distil the whole, as, if necessary, the distillate or the residue can be examined for other poisons. Ether. Si/mptoms and Effects.—Ether, in moderate doses, has a hot biirning taste, and produces during swallowing a sense of heat and constriction in the throat. It causes, like alcohol, great excitement and exhilaration, with, subsequently, intoxication, but persons may become habituated to it, and thus afler a time it may be taken in very large quantities with comparative impunity. The effects produced on the system, when a largf dose has been taken, are not unlike those occasioned by alcohol. Orfila found that about half an ounce of sulphuric ether, administered to a dog, caused, in a few minutes, a disposition to vomit. This was followed by giddiness, and in ten minutes by an entire loss of power in the muscles. The breathing was painful and hurried, but there were no convulsions. After a slight abatement in the symptoms, the dog fell into a state of insensibility and died in three hours. The whole of the mucous membrane of the stomach was of a blackish-red colour, and with the other coats intensely inflamed. There was slight inflammation of the duodenum; but the rest of the alimentary canal was in a liealtlly condition. The heart contained black blood partly coagulated: tlie lungs were gorged with fluid blood. (Op. cit. ii. 531.) Ether as a liquid has not, so far as I know, destroyed life : but when its vapour has been breathed it has caused death in several instances. (See 'On Poisons,' 2nd Ed. p. 731. Analysis.—When ether has been taken as a liquid and has caused death, it may be separated from the contents of the stomach by the process described for alcohol. The chromic acid process applied to the vapour during dis- tillation will enable the analyst to detect a minute quantity; and, by its peculiar odour, ether may be easily distinguished from alcohol or pyroxylic spirit. 1. Ether is liighly infiammable, and burns with a yellow smoky flame, producing carbonic acid and water. 2. When shaken with its bulk of water, only a small portion is dissolved, the rest floats on the surface. If taken in


[382/1290 b21964944_0382.jp2]

POISONING BY LIQUID CHLOROFORM. 318 a liquid form, it may be separated from the contents of the stomach by dis- tillation, and the product rectified by redistillation with carbonate of potash at a temperature of about 120°. Chloroform. Symptoms.—This liquid, when taken in a large dose, appears to_ affect the system like alcohol: but as a liquid it cannot be regarded as an active poison. I have elsewhere recorded a case conmiunicated to me by Mr. Jackson, of Shef- field, in which a man swallowed four ounces of chlorolbrm. He was able to walk for a considerable distance after taking this dose, but he subsequently fell into a state of coma—the pupils were dilated, the breathing was stertorous, the skin cold, the pulse.imperceptible, and there were general convulsions. He recovered in five days.*('Med. Gaz.,' vol. xlvii. p. G75.) A private in a cavalry regiment in the United States swallowed nearly two ounces of chloroform. He was seen ten or fifteen minutes afterwards; he had already vomited, and was found insensible, with stertorous breathing, and a pulse of about GO. The stomach-pump was employed, and some spirits of ammonia were injected. The pulse became more feeble, the breathing slower, and the pupils were insen- sible to light. The surface was cold, and for a time he continued to get worse, the face becoming purple, while the pulse was intermittent and hardly dis cernible. Two hours and a half after taking the poison, however, a gradual improvement commenced, but sensibility did not return until four hours later. For several days he continued to suffer from great irritability of the stomach, and eventually he had an attack of jaundice. (' Amer. Journ. Med. Science,' Oct. p. 367; ' Med. Times and Gazette,' Nov. 28, 1857, p. 558.) In two cases, alarming symptoms have been produced by much smaller doses, and one of these proved fatal. In March, 1857, a lady swallowed half an ounce of pure chloroform. In five minutes she was quite insensible, generally convulsed, the jaws clenched, the face slightly fiushed, the pulse full and rather oppressed, and she foamed at the mouth. She vomited, and in twenty minutes the convul- sions had left her; soon afterwards she had a relapse, and did not recover for twenty-four hours. (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' Dec. 12, 1857, p. 615.) The symptoms in this case appear to have been mixed with those of hysteria and epilepsy. The following case communicated to me by Mr. Thursefield, of Brosely, in March, 1854, is a clear case of poisoning by liquid chloro- form. A boy, set. 4, was brought to him by his father in a state of total in- sensibility. It appears that he had swallowed a drachm of chloroform, and soon afterwards laid his head on his mother's lap and lost all consciousness. Mr. Thursefield saw him about twenty minutes afi;erwards. He was then in- sensible, cold, and pulseless. Mustard plasters were applied to the legs; they acted well, but produced no impression on the sensibility. His breathing varied; it was sometimes natural, at other times stertorous. He became warmer, his pulse full and regular; and he continued three hours in this state, when he died quite calmly without a struggle, in spite of every effort made for his recovery. This is the smallest dose of liquid chloroform that has de- stroyed life. Chloroform Vapour.—The vapour when respired in a concentrated form, is speedily fatal to life. If it is diluted with a certain proportion of air, it produces insensibility, with entire loss of muscular power in from eight to ten minutes, and the patient speedily recovers after the vapour is withdrawn. Cases of death from the inhalation of the vapour for surgical purposes are now very nume- rous, and the symptoms and post-mortem appearances are Avell-marked. (See ' On Poisons,' 2nd Edit. p. 738 ; also ' Lancet,' April 16, 1859, p. 400, and April 23, p. 425.) In some instances death has taken place Avithin two minutes from the commencement of inhalation. In one in which only thirty drops had


[383/1290 b21964944_0383.jp2]

FATAL EFFECTS OF CIILOrvOFORM YArOUR. 319 been taken in vapour, the patient died in one minute, and in another, so small a quantity as fifteen or twenty drops proved speedily fatal. (' Table of Fatal Cases' by Dr. Warren, U.S. p. 23.) Chloroform, therefore, operating through the lungs, has destroyed lite more rapidly, and in a smaller dose, than any other poison known. Its fatal operation is sometimes suddenly manifested aiter the withdrawal of the vapour, apparently by an accumulative effect on the blood. In one case witnessed by a friend, the heart suddenly ceased to beat four minutes after the vapour had been withdrawn. The digital arteries which had been divided in the operation suddenly ceased to bleed. The man was dead. The fatal effects are generally ascribed to idiosyncrasy or to the unfore- seen condition of a fatty or flabby heart. Admitting this to be to some extent the true cause of the iatality, it cannot be denied that fatty and flabby hearts have become very common, since the introduction of chloroform-vapour for surgical and other purposes. In cases of alleged robbery and rape, it has been sometimes stated that the person assaulted was rendered suddenly insensible by chloroform ; but chloroform vapour does not produce immediate insensibility, unless it also produces asphyxia and death. Mr. Stevenson found that in more than two hundred cases of its administration at Guy's Hospital, adults were not commonly rendered insensible imtil after the lapse of eight minutes, the dose being three and a half draclims given in half-drachms. In March 18G3, a woman, set. 40, took ten drachms in thirty-three minutes, in half- drachms, and was still conscious and able to talk. Analysis.—Chloroform is a heavy colourless liquid (sp. gr. 1"484), neutral in its reaction, sinking in water in globules, and only to a slight extent dissolving in that liquid. It has a fragrant odour like that of apples; it is dissolved by alcohol and ether. It is very volatile, but not combustible. Like alcohol it dissolves camphor. Nitric and sulphuric acids produce no change in it. It boils at 140°, and evolves a vapour which at a red heat is resolved into chlorine and hydrochloric acid. On this effect a process has been suggested for separating it from the blood and tissues when it has proved fatal in the form of vapour. The substance supposed to contain chloroform is placed in a fla.sk, like that shown in the annexed illiistration. The neck of the flask is fitted with a cork perforated to admit a hard glass tube, bent at right angles and having a length of from twelve to fifteen inches. The flask is gradually plunged into water at about 160°, and at the same time, the middle portion of the tube is heated to full redness by an air-gas jet. At a red heat, chloroform vapour is decomposed, and chlorine and hydrochloric acid are among the products of its decomposition. Litmus paper applied to the mouth of the tube, is reddened : starch paper wetted with iodide of potassium, is rendered blue, and nitrate of silver is pre- cipitated white. Two drops of pure chloro- form were thus readily detected, and so persistent was the vapoiu* in the closed vessel, Apparatus for the detection of the vapour that it was detected after one, two, and even °^ Chloroform, three weeks, Tavo drops added to a quantity of putrefied blood Averc detected by a similar process after a fortnight, the flask being closed, but the mouth of the tube remaining exposed to air. This method of detecting chloroform by its products, appears to be quite satisfactory. In practice, however, it will be found a very difficult matter to detect it, even where we know it has


[384/1290 b21964944_0384.jp2]

CIILOEOFORM. ANALYSIS. CAMPHOR. 320 been administered. Some years since, in conjunction with the late Dr. Snow, I examined by this process the blood of a boy who had died in Guy's Hospital from the effects of chloroform vapour, but Avithout detecting any trace of it. There was no odour in the blood, and the result was negative. In 18G3, I examined the blood of three persons, taken while they were under the full operation of chloroform, and collected in closely-stopped glass bottles. One of the samples, examined within half an hour after removal from the living body, had no odovxr of chloroform, and gave not the slightest indication of its presence. The two other samples kept in close bottles until tested, forty-eight hours after removal, did not contain a trace of chloroform vapour, Either the quantity in a few ounces of blood is too small for detection, or it is rapidly lost by its volatility, or it is converted in the blood into formic acid or some other product. As chloroform is much more volatile than ether, and its odour is not so pungent, it is not so easily detected in the dead body by the smell. The body should be inspected as soon as possible, and any solids or liquids intended for examination should be placed in well closed glass vessels. If the smell can still be perceived in the blood or organs, the vapour may be easily detected by the method above described. Chloroform, if not eliminated or lost by its volatility, may have been converted in the blood into formic acid, and thus removed from the ordinary processes of chemistry. Camphor. There are but few instances recorded in which camphor has proved fatal in the human subject: but it has on several occasions produced alarming symp- toms, and would probably have destroyed life, had it not been esirly removed from the stomach. In the few cases that have been observed, its effects wei-e somewhat different. Symptoms and Appearances.—Camphor operates on the brain and nervous system. In one instance, in which it proved fatal, a woman swallowed in the morning about tiventfj grains of camphor dissolved in rectified spirits of wine and mixed with tincture of myrrh. In half an hour she was suddenly seized with languor, giddiness, occasional loss of sight, delirium, numbness, tingling an4 coldness of the extremities so that she could hardly walk. The pulse was quick and respiration difficult, but she suffered no pain in any part. On the administration of an emetic, she vomited a yellowish liquid smelling strongly of camphor. In the evening, the symptoms were much diminished, but she had slight convulsive fits during the night. The next day she was conva- lescent ; the difficulty of breathing, however, continued more or less for several weeks. This is the smallest dose of camphor Avliich appears to have been attended with serious symptoms in an adult. In January 18G3, an infant of fifteen months died from the effects of some camphorated oil given to it by mistake. Convulsions ensued and death took place in thirteen hours. Three cases of poisoning by camphor are reported by Dr. Schaaf, one of which proved fatal. A woman gave about thirty grains (half a teaspoonful) of powdered camphor to each of her three children as a vermifuge. Two of the children were respectively of the ages of three or five years, the third was an infant aged eighteen months. The first symptoms were paleness of the face with a fixed and stupid look. Delirium followed, Avith a sense of burnincr in the throat, and great thirst. Vomiting, purging, and convulsions supervened, and in one child the convulsions Avere most violent. The two elder children after suffering thus for three hours, fell into a comatose sleep, and on aAA'aking the symptoms passed off. The infant died in seven hours, not havin"- mani- fested any return of consciousness from the first occurrence of con\n.ilsions C Journal de Chimie Medicale,' 1850, p. 507.) The severity of the symptoms


[385/1290 b21964944_0385.jp2]

321 POISOiS'ING BY TOBACCO. is fully explained by the large quantity administered and the age oC the children. In a dose of one drachm given in a clyster, camphor produced alarming symptoms. Med. Gaz.' vol. 48, p. 552.) In a case reported in the Medical Gazette (vol. 11, p. 772), 120 grains were taken by a physician, and all that he experienced was lightness in the head with great exhilaration. There was no derangement of the stomach or bowels. He slept profoundly for some hours, and awoke very weak and exhausted. He also perspired greatly during his sleep. It is difficult to draw any conclusion from this case, as the quantity taken was conjectural, and the patient Avas not seen by any person while labouring under the effects of the poison. A soldier took a large quantity of camphor daily. For three days it had no effect upon him. On the fifth day, he suffered from great pain and a burning sensation in the i stomach. His head was painful: there was giddiness with an incessant desire to walk about, although, like a dnuiken man, he could hardly keep on his legs. He soon fell completely insensible—-his limbs were cold, his face was pale, his body convulsed, and the pupils were dilated. These symptoms were followed by an irresistible desire to sleep. In two or three days he recovered. (' Med. Times and Gaz.' Dec. 1858, p. 645.) A case of poisoning by camphor would be recognized by the odour of the breath, a symptom Avhich would attract the attention of a non-professional person. The presence of this substance in the stomach would be at once in- dicated by its odour. Tobacco. Sipnptoms.—The effects Avhich this substance produces, when taken in a large dose, either in the form of powder or infusion, are well-marked. The symptoms are faintness, nausea, vomiting, giddiness, delirium, loss of power in the limbs, general relaxation of the muscular system, trembling, complete prostration of strength, coldness of the surface with cold clammy perspiration, convulsive movements, paralysis, and death. In some cases there is purgijig, with violent pain in the abdomen ; in others there is rather a sense of sinking or depression in the region of the lieart, passing into syncope, or creating a sense of impending dissolution. With the above-mentioned symptoms there is dilatation of the pupils, dimness of sight, with confusion of ideas, a small, weak and scarcely perceptible pulse, and difficulty of breathing. Poisoning by tobacco has not often given rise to medico-legal discussion. This is the more remarkable, as it is an easily accessible substance, and the possession of it would not, as in the case of other poisons, excite surprise or suspicion. In June 1854 a man was charged with the death of an infant set. 10 weeks by poisoning it Avith tobacco. He placed a quantity of tobacco in the mouth of the infant, with the view, as he stated, of making it sleep. The infant was completely narcotized and died on the second day. It is probably more extensively used to aid the purposes of robbers than is commonly believed; and there is reason to suppose that porter and other liquors sold in brothels, are sometimes drugged either with tobacco or with snuff prepared from it. Scotch snuff is said to be used for this purpose. Tobacco owes its poisonous properties to the presence of a liquid volatile alkaloid, Nicotina. NicoTJNA.—This is a deadly poison, and like prussic acid it destroys life in small doses with great rapidity. I found that a rabbit was killed by a single drop in three minutes and a half In fifteen seconds the animal lost all power of standing, was violently convulsed in its fore and hind legs, and its back was arched convulsively (opisthotonos). A frothy a,lkaline mucus escaped from its mouth having the odour of nicotina. (' Guy's Hospital Re- ports,' Oct. 1858, p. 355.) A case of poisoning by this alkaloid which occurred in Belgium in 1851, was th(> subject of a trial for murder. (' Ann. d'Hyg.' Y


[386/1290 b21964944_0386.jp2]

rOISONIXG BY NICOTINA. 322 1851, 2, pp. 1G7 and 147). The Count and Countess Bocmme vfcve cliurgcd with the murder of the Countess's brotlier, u M. Foiigmes, by adniinistermg to him nicotina while he Avas dining with them at the Chateau of Bitremont. Tlie poison was ibrcibly achninistered. The deceased did not survive more than five minutes, and was not seen hving by any of the attendants. The possession of the poison, as well as the moral evidence, fixed the crime on th'i Count, and he was condemned and executed. The appearances after death were to a great extent altered or destroyed by the pouring of some strong acid (acetic) into the mouth and over the body of the deceased, in order to conceal or remove the odour of nicotina. M. Stas detected the poison in small quantity in the tongue, throat, stomach, liver, and lungs of the deceased, as well as in a wooden plank of the iioor near to wliich he was sitting. A second case of poisoning by this alkaloid, and the only case recorded in this country, occurred in London as an act of suicide in June 1858. A g(!ntleman swallowed a quantity of nicotina from a bottle, and almost immediately afterwards was seen in the act of falling to the iloor. lie was cari-ied to an adjoining room, but before this could be reached, he was dead. The symptoms noticed were that deceased stared wildly : there Avere no convulsions, and he died quietly, heaving a deep sigh in expiring. In prt)ducing these effects nicotina resemljles prussic acid. The quantity of nicotina taken, could not be determined. The deceased appears to have been rendered immediately insensible, and to have died in from three to live minutes, after having taken the poison. The appearances observed Avcrc ;i general relaxation of the muscles, prominent and staring eyes, bloated features, great fulness, with lividity about the neck. There was no odour resembling nicotina or tobacco perceptible about the body. When examined between two and three days after death, putrefaction had occurred especially in the course of the veins. The swelling of the neck was found to arise from an effusion of dark liquid blood. The scalp and the membranes of the brain, were filled with dark-coloured blood. The luners were enQforiied and o1'a dark purple colour. The cavities of the heart were empty, with the exee])- tion of the left auricle, Avhich contained two di'achms of dark-coloured blood. The stomach contained a chocolate-coloured fluid (reserved for analysis) : the mucous membrane was of a dark crimson red colour from the most intense congestion. There was no odour excepting that of pi;trefaction. The liver was congested and of a purple black colour. The blood throughout the body was black and liquid, but in some parts it had the consistency of i treacle. I found nicotina in small (piantity in the contents of the stomach, also in the liver and lungs; but as these organs had been placed in contact Avith the stomach, it could not be inferred that the poison had been absorbed and deposited in them. Analysis.—A s<miple of nicotina which I examined had a pale amber colour, and evolved a peculiar acrid odour, affecting the nose and eves, re- sembling when diluted that of sUile tobacco smoke. It had the consistency of a thin oil, gave a greasy stain to paper, Avhich soon disappeared, owing to its volatility. When heated on platinum or on paper it burnt with a bright yellow riame, emitting a thick black smoke. It Avas poAverfully alkaline, and imparted a strong alkaline reaction to Avater Avithout readily dissolvin<T in ■ it. The aqueous solution, even Avhen much diluted, retained the pecu1i:ir odour. Nicotina is dissolved by alcohol and ether, and the latter licpiid Avill r(!move it from its acpieons solution. 1. Chloride of platinum produces in the acpieous solution an orange yelloAV crystalline precipitate. 2. Corrosive sul)limate gives a Avhite jjrecipilale. o. Arsenio-nitrate of silver gives i yellow precipitate. In all these characters nicotina resembles aninu)nfa : tin difiereiices, npart iVoin the odour, which is an imptaiant distinction, are, !


[387/1290 b21964944_0387.jp2]

Js'lCOTIXA IX OllGANlC MIXTURES. COCCULUS IXDICUS. 323 Iodine water gives a brown precipitate (in ammonia tliere is no precipitate, the colour is discharged). 5. Tannic acid gives a whitish yellow precipitate (in ammonia there is no precipitate, but a red colour is imparted). G. Cliloriodide of potassium and mercury copiously precipitates it, even when much diluted. 7. Gallic acid gives no precipitate (in ammonia it ])roduces a pinkish red colour, rapidly changing to an olive green). 8. Sulphuric acid and bichromate of potash produce Avith it a green colour by tlie liberation of oxide of chromium. (See ' Guy's Hospital Reports,' Oct. •1S.)8, p. 354.) Organic Mixtures.—To separate nicotina from the contents of a stomach, these should be digested in cold distilled water, acidulated with sulphuric acid in the proportion of a drop to an ounce. This liquid is strained, filtered, and the residue pressed. It is then to be evaporated to one half in a water bath—digested with its bulk of cold alcohol, filtered, and the alcoholic liquid evaporated in a water bath. The sulphate of nicotina is now dissolved out of the residue by a small quantity of water and the solution is rendered alkaline by potash and then shaken in a tube with its bulk of ether; the ethereal liquid is allowed to evaporate in a series of watch-glasses, and if nicotina be present the alkaloid will be left in small oily-looking globules. The odour may not be perceptible until the residue is heated, when its peculiar acridity will be brought out. A few drops of water should be added to the residue in eacli glass—it will be found to be strongly alkaline, and the different tests may then be applied. It was by this process that I discovered the poison in the liody of the gentleman whose case is above related. In reference to the rabbit killed by a single drop (supra), nicotina was found in the stomach and its contents: there was a trace found in half an ounce of the blood of the animal, and the poison was clearly detected after a week in the tongue and soft jwts of the throat of the animal, but there was no trace of nicotina in the liver, heart, or lungs. Levant Nut. (Cocculus Indicus.) S>/mptoj)is mid Effects.—This is the fruit or berry of the Anamirta Cocculus {Levant Nut), imported from the East Indies. The berry contains from one to two per cent, of a poisonous principle {Picrotoxine). The shell or husk * <^ contains no picrotoxine but a non-poisonous ]n-inciple called menispermine. The seeds, in powder or decoction, give rise to nausea, vomiting, and griping pains, followed by stupor and intoxication. There are, so far as I am aware, only two well-authenticated ^ tiic sanie, sam in soction with one-iniif instances of this substance having proved of tim somi-imiar komei. ,. , ^ , ry T n ''■ Tlie kornci, containing picrotoxine. fatal to man. Several men suffered from this poison in 1829, near Liverpool: each had a glass of rum strongly im- l)rcgnated with cocculus indicus. One died that evening ; the rest recovered. (' Traill's Outlines,' 14G.) Of the second case, the following details have been l)ublished. A boy, a?t. 12, was per.suaded by his companions to swalloAV two scruples of tlie composition used for poisoning fish. It contained cocculus indicus. In a few minutes he perceived an unpleasant taste, with burning pain in the gullet and stomach, not relieved by frequent vomiting—as well as pain extending over the wliole of the abdomen. In spite of treatment, a violent attack of gastro-enteritis supervened, and there was much febrile ex- itement, followed by delirium and purging, under which the patient sank on the nineteenth day after taking the poison. On inspection, the vessels of the pia mater were congested Avith dark-coloured litpiid blood. There Avas Y 2


[388/1290 b21964944_0388.jp2]

324 rOISONIXG BY COCCULUS INDICUS. serous effusion in the A^entricles of tlic brain, and the right lung was congested. In the abdomen there Avere all the marks of peritonitis in an advanced stage. The stomach was discoloured, and its coats were thinner and softer than natural. (Canstatt, ' Jahresbericht,' 1844, 5, 298.) Porter, ale, and beer owe their intoxicating properties in some instances to a decoction, or extract of these berries. The fraud is perpetrated by a low class of publicans. They reduce the strength of the beer by Avater and s;ilt, and then give to it an intoxicating property l)y means of this poisonous ex- tract. A medical man consulted me some years since, in reference to the similarity of cerebral symptoms suffered by several of his patients in a district in London. It was ascertained that they wore supplied with porter by retail from tlie same house. The effects produced by this drug are remarkalile: there is a strong disposition to sleep, and at the same time wakefulness. There is a heavy lethargic stupor, Avith a consciousness of passing events, T)Ub a complete loss of voluntary power. It is a kind of nightmare feeling, alto- gether different from healthy sleep. Cocculus indicus is sometimes used by robbers to intoxicate their victims, and to this form of intoxication, the term ' hocussing' is applied. One method of detecting this poison in alcoholic li([uids, consists in distilling the alcohol and testing the extract by physiological or chemical processes. The extract containing cocculus indicus is intensely bitter, and soon produces on man or an animal stupefying and narcotic symptoms. The extract of a genuine alcoholic liquid loses its narcotic pro- perties when all the alcohol has been separated from it by distillation. For some remarks on this adulteration of beer and other liquids, and a pi-ocess for separating the poisonous principle, picrotoxine, by amylic alcoliol, see ' Chemical News,' March 12, 18G4, p. 123. Cocculus indicus operates readily as a poison on animals, and it lias thus been frequently used for the malicious destruction of fish and game. In one instance referred to me recently, there was reason to believe that 270 young pheasants had been poisoned by grain soaked in a decoction of this substance. Barber's poisoned wheat for the destruction of birds owes its poisonous pi*o- perties to cocculus indicus. (Horsley.) PicnoTOXiNE.—The poisonous principle of the berry of cocculus indicus crys- tallises in slender hexahedral prisms, having a silky lustre. It is soluble in 150 parts of cold water, but is more soluble in boiling Avater, and the solution has a very bitter taste. When heated in a tube, picrotoxine evolves an acid vapour like digitaline. Hydrochloric acid dissolves it Avithout change of colour. It is soluble in alcohol, ether, chloroform, and in amylic alcohol. Sulphuric acid imparts to it an orange yellow colour, Avhich becomes of a pale yellow by dilution. When bichromate of potash is added to the sulphuric acid mixture, green oxide of chronium is produced. Strong nitric acid dissolves it Avithout any change of colour. Crystals of Piorotoxino mat'iiirieii Tannic acid and the chloriodide of potassium and mercury do not precipitate it from its solutions. When boiled Avith potash and the sulphate of copper it reduces the oxide like grape sugar. It is said, like salicine, to belong to the class of ghicosides. Mr. Langley has shoAvn that this principle may be separated from many of the poisonous alkaloids by taking advantage of its peculiar chemical ]>ro- pcrties. It does not combine Avith acids to form salts, but readily with bases. Thus Avater containing a small quantity of potasli will dissolve one-


[389/1290 b21964944_0389.jp2]

325 riCROTOXIXE. POISONING BY DARNEL SEEDS. sixth or one-eighth pai-t of its weight of picrotoxine. Water thus alka- Yised will, it is well known, readily yield most of the alkaloids to ether, "when this liquid is shaken with the solution ; but if the licjuid is strongly acidulated, the alkaloids remain combined with the acid, wliile the ether shaken Avith tlie liquid entirely removes the picrotoxine. Thus, in examining bi'er supposed to be adulterated Avith cocculus indicus, the liquid should be acidulated with hydrochloric acid, and then shaken witli two volumes of ether. The ethereal solution thus obtained, when spontaneously evaporated, leaves the picrotoxine in crystals. Mr. Langley states that by his process he has detected so small a quantity as l-750th of a grain of picrotoxine in a pint of ale. The stomach of a cat Avhich had been poisoned was treated with alcohol and tlie solution evaporated to dryness. Acidulated Avater was poured on the residue, and the ])icrotoxine Avith some organic matter Avas dissolved. The acid liquid was shaken Avith ether, and crystals of picrotoxine were obtained by the evaporation of the ethereal solution. (See ' Pharm. Journal,' December l«G2,p. 277.) Beaiided Daiinel. (LoLiuM Temulentum.) S>/mptoms and Effects.—Poisoning by darnel is generally the result of acci- dent ii-om the intermixture of the seeds of this grass Avith Avheat or rye. The seeds are ground into flour and eaten with the bread. In January 1854, Dr. Kingsley, of Roscrea, furnished me Avith the particulars of some cases in Avhich several families (including about thirty persons) suffered severely from the effects of bread containing, by accidental admixture, the flour of darnel seeds. The persons Avho partook of this bread staggered about as if in- toxicated : there Avas giddiness, Avith violent tremblings of the arms and legs, similar to those observed in delirium tremens, but of much greater intensity (the patients requesting those about tliem to hold them, and experiencing great comfort from this assistance being given to them) ; greatly impaired vision, eveiy object appearing of a green colour to the sufferer; cold- ness of the skin, particularly of the hands and feet; great pros- tration of strength, and in several cases vomiting. Under the free use of stimulants and castor oil the whole of the patients were convalescent on the foUoAving day, but much debilitated from the effects of the poison. Among the symptoms in other cases there has been noticed a sense of burning heat in the mouth and throat, with confusion in the head, trembling, and a small irregular pulse. (See 'Ed. Monthly Jour.' Aug. 1850, p. 180.) Ann/j/sis.—The plant is knoAvn by its botanical characters. Pfaff litis lately examined darnel, in order to discover a poisonous alkaloid; but there Avas no trace of such a substance. By distillation Avith Avater he obtained two kinds of ethereal oil, one lighter and the other heavier than Avater ; they Avere colourless and had the odour of fusel-oil. Ordeal ok Calabar Bean (Piiysostigma Venenosum). The Calabar bean is a large leguminous seed of a dark colour, resembling a garden bean, but much thicker and more rounded in its form. It is brought from the western coast of Africa, and is there employed by the natives as an ordeal bean when persons are suspected of Avitchcraft. The common belief is, that the innocent vomit and are safe, Avhile the guilty retain the poison, and (lie from its effects. So strong is popular confidence in this test, that those Avho are suspected, voluntarily lake an enuilsion of this dreadful seed, and, as Dr. Loliiim Temu- lentum, or Beimloc] narnel.


[390/1290 b21964944_0390.jp2]

I'OISOMXG r.Y TTTE CALABAR OU ORDEAL BEAN. Christison remarks, many an innocent person tlnis pays the penalty of In'ar rash rehance on tliis superstitious custom. As it is a firm matter of faith that if a man dies he is guilty, such a custom is • beyond the reach of any appeal to reason. lUustra-i tious of this bean of its natural size are subjoined. This Ix'an owes its properties to the presence of in alkaloidal substance called Fhi/sostigmine. It s found in the cotyledon, and the process adopted lor its separation by Jobst and Hesse is descril)ed in the ' Chemical News' for March 5, 18C4, p. 10'.). The seed or bean has a thin hard and brittle covering; the kernel inside is white and Aveighs from thirty-six to fifty grains; the whole seed a. The bean of its natural size, ubout sixty-seven grains. Dr. Christison coi;ld 6. Thesameseenaigewise. detect no poisonous alkaloid in the seed, but he found that the active principle (physostigmine) could be extracted by alcohol, which dissolves 2"7 per cent, of the seed including this substance. That alcohol will remove the poisonous principle is proved by the fact that ihe exhausted i-esidue is not always poisonous. (Bouchardat, ' Ann. de Therapeutique,' 18G4, p. 73. Sec also ' Pharm. Jour.' 18()3, p. oHl.) Tlie greater part of the seed, as in nux vomica, consists of starcliy and other inert matters, with a small quantity of oi'. The kernel is yellowish white, without bitterness, acrimony, aroma, or any other impression on the organ of taste* In fact it cannot be distinguished by taste from a haricot bean. Twenty-one grains in fine powder Avere placed in the cellular tissue of a rabbit; lor three minutes there was no change. The animal then became Aveak and languid; in four minutes it Avas unable to raise itself Avhen placed on its side. The body then became quite flaccid and respiration ceased in five minutes. There Avere at intervals slight irregular tAvitchings in . the muscles of the trunk, and a jerking of the head backwards. Tavo grains of the alcoholic extract produced similar symptoms. At the end of tAvo minutes, Avithout any previous indication, the animal suddenly became Aveak, fell on its side, struggled a little Avith its feet, and ceased to breathe in another • minute. The poison, according to Dr. Christison, produces a primary ini- • pression on the heart causing paralysis of that organ, the insensibility and I coma being only apparent. The results appear to shoAv that there is also > paralysis of the voluntary and respiratory muscles, but a retention of con- - sciousness. ('Pharmaceutical Journal,' 1855, p. 473.) Desiring to try the effects of this seed on himself. Dr. Christison took the eighdi i part of a seed, or six grains, one night before going to bed. There Avas a slight 1 sense of numbness in the limbs during the night, but in the morning no urgent symptoms of any kind. He then cheAved and swallowed the fourth part of a seed (twelve grains). In tAventy juinutes he was seized Avith giddiness, and a general feeling of torpor over the Avhole frame. He immediately SAvallowed an emetic and thus emptied his stomach. The giddiness, Aveakriess, and faintness increased to such a degree that he Avas obliged to lie down in bed- In this state he Avas seen by tAVo medical friends, Avho found him prostrate and pale, the heart and piilse extremely feeble and tunmltuously irregular, the mental faculties entire, extreme faintness threatening dissolution, but no apprehension of death on the part of the patient. There Avas no uneasy feeling of any kind, no pains or numbness, no prickling, not even any sense of suffering from the great feebleness of the heart's action. There Avas tbe Avill but not the poAver to vomit; the limbs became chill Avith a vague feeling of discomfort. Stimulants were employed, and warmth and pulsatfon, with:'


[391/1290 b21964944_0391.jp2]

PHYSOSTIGMIXE. POISONOUS MUSIIEOOMS. po\Vt'r of moving, gradually returned. Two hours after the poison had been taken lie felt di-owsy, and slept for two houi-s more, l)iit with such activity of mind, that he had no consciousness of having been asleep. The tunuiltuous notion of the heart continued. After this the symptoms gradually disappeared, and the next day he was quite Avell. (' Pharm. Jour.' 1855, p. 474.) In August, 18C4, filty children were poisoned at Liverpool by reason of their having eaten these beans. The sweepings of a ship from the west«coast of Africa had been thrown on a heap of rubbish; the children found the beans and ate them. A boy, OBt. G, who ate six beans, died in a very short time. The principal symptoms were severe griping pains, constant vomiting, and contracted pupils. In addition to these symptoms the face was pale, and the eyes were bi-ight and protruding. In attempting to walk the children staggered about as if they were drunk. A drop of the cxti'act applied to the eye of an animal produces in from ten minutes to a quarter of an hour, a remarkable contraction of the pupil. This has been observed to last in children for fifteen or twenty hours. (Bouchardat, ' Ann. de Therapeutique,' 1864, p. 73.) In this respect, the poison is eminently distinguished from atropia, daturia, and hyoscyamia, which cause excessive dilatjition of the pupil. Dr. Harley found in his experiments with this substance that it causes contraction of the piipil when taken internally, as well as when applied locally. It paralyzed the motor nerves, and lelt the intellect and muscular irritability unimpaired. It destroyed life by paralyzing the respiratory muscles, and although it weakened the heart's power, it neither .stopped the circulation, nor arrested the heart's action. It is not, according to him, a cardiac but a respiratory poison. It is closely allied in its effects to woorara and conia, but more to the latter. It differs from both, in its tendency to produce muscular twitchings, and in its power of causing con- traction of the pupil. Neither woorara nor conia has any effect on the iris, ('Lancet,' 1803, vol. 1,717.) Analysis.—The effects produced by an alcoholic extract of the seed applied to an animal furnish the only means of detection. The contraction of the pupils is a good physiological test of the presence of the poison. Poisonous Mushrooms (Fungi). 6i/mptoms and Effects.—The noxious species of mushrooms act sometimes as narcotics, and on other occasions as irritants. It would appear from the reports of several cases, tliat when the narcotic symptoms are excited, they come on soon after the meal at which the mushrooms have been eaten, and that they are chiefly manifested by giddiness, dimness of sight, and debility. The person appears as if intoxicated, and there are singular illusions of sense. Spasms and convulsions have been occasionally Avitnessed among the symptoms when the case has proved fatal. Dr. Peddle has related three instances of poisoning by mushrooms (' Edin. M. and S. J.,' vol. 49, 200), in which the poison acted as a pure narcotic; there was no pain in the abdomen, nor irritation in the alimentary canal. The narcotic symptoms began in half an hour with giddi- ness and stupor: the fii'st effect with one patient was, that every object appeared to him to be of a blue colour. The three patients recovered, two of them rapidly. When the drowsiness passes off, there is generally nausea and vomiting ; but sometimes vomiting and purging precede the stupor. If the syiliptoms do not occur until many liotu-s after the meal, they partake more of the characters of irritation ;—indicated by pain and swelling of tlie abdomen, vomiting, and purging. In a recent case of poisoning by mushrooms, there was slight vomiting about an hour and a half after the meal, but no violent symptoms until after the lapse of ten hours. Several cases, in which the .symptoms did not appear until after the lapse of fourteen hours, are reported


[392/1290 b21964944_0392.jp2]

328 POISONING BY MUSHROOMS. SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES. in the ' Medical Gazette ' (vol. 25, p. 110). In some instances the symptoms of poisoning have not commenced until thirty hours after the meal; and m these, narcotism followed the symptoms of irritation. It might iDe supposed that these variable effects were due to different properties in the mushrooms ; hut the same fungi have acted on members of the same family, in one case like irritants, and in another like narcotics. In most cases recovery takes place, especially if there is early vomiting. In the few instances which have proved fatal, there has been greater or less inflammation of the stomach and bowels, Avith congestion of the vessels of the brain. See ' Med. Gaz.' vol. 4(3, p. 307 ; vol. 47, p. 673; and ' Journ. de Chimie Med.' 1853, p. G94.) Mr. Taylor, of Emsworth, relates a fatal case of poisoning by fungi which Avas attended with symptoms of irritation resembling those caused by arsenic. There was no loss of consciousness or sensibility. G. F., a3t. 13, fried and ate for hreakHist, at 8.30 a.m. two fungi which he had found growing under a tree. He returned to his work without complaint. At 12 he had his dinner of pork and vegetables. At 1 p.m. he returned to work where he remained until 6 P.M. Avorking the whole time without any complaint. Soon after he reached home, he complained of feeling ill, and vomited violently. Purging tlien followed with severe spasmodic pain in the abdomen. These symptoms continued throughout the night until 6 a.m. The boAvels then ceased to act. Mr. Taylor saw him at 11.30 a.m. He was then suffering from constant pain in the bowels occasionally aggravated : there was tenderness over the abdomen generally, but especially over the course of the transverse colon, with vomiting • every ten minutes—great thirst, skin Avarm and perspiring, pulse ninety, and great depression. At 3 a.m. on the second day he Avas again seen. Vomiting and purging had returned. There Avas great exhaustion ; pulse imperceptible ; the action of the heart feeble. He Avas lying in bed on his back with the knees draAvn up. Sensibility and consciousness Avere perfect. He complained of great pain in the stomach ; there Avas tenderness over the abdomen, but no swelling of the cavity. In another hour he died, i. e. about forty-four hours after eating the fungi, and about thirty-four after the first setting in of the symptoms. Others partook of the fungi, but in small quantity, and they did not suffer. On inspection, the heart on the right side contained a little fluid blood. The left ventricle Avas contracted and empty. The lungs Avere healthy, and there Avas only cadaveric congestion. The lining membrane of the stomach and small intestines Avas throughout injected, the blueish red appearance diminishing in intensity as it approached the csecum. There Averc a few ecchymosed patches near the pyloric end of the stomach. The organ con- tained six ounces of a broAvnish liquid resembling thin gruel. The large intestines were empty and pale, and the spleen Avas congested; the other organs were healthy. (' Med. Times and Gaz.' Nov. 21, 1863, p. 536). In many of its features, and in the absence of narcotic symptoms, this case resembled a case of acute poisoning by arsenic. The fact that nearly ten hours elapsed before the symptoms of irritation commenced, and that there Avas no blood in the matters discharged by vomiting and purging, were the most marked differences. Analysis.—The discovery of portions of the mushroom? undigested in the matter vomited, or the description of the food eaten, Avill commonly lead to a recognition of this form of poisoning. The poisonous principle contained in mushrooms is called Fnngin:, it appears to be of a volatile nature and soluble in hot water ; for some varieties of noxious mushrooms may be eaten Avith impunity, Avhen they have been Avell boiled in Avater and afterAvards pressed. One of the most poisonous in this country, Amanita muscaria or Fly-mushroom, renders the Avater in Avhich it is boiled so poisonous, that


[393/1290 b21964944_0393.jp2]

rOISONIXG BY IIEXBANE. 329 animals are killed by it, Avhile the boiled fungus itself has no effect tipon them. Tlie liquid jn-ocured from it is used as a fly-poisun, Avhence the name of the mushroom is derived. It is an autumnal fungus known by its rich orange- red colour. HkNBANE. (HyOSCYAMUS NIGER.) Symptoms and Aj^pearances—The seeds, roots, and leaves of this plant are poisonous. When the dose is not sufficient to destroy life, the symptoms are—general excitement, fulness of the pulse, flushing of the face, weight in the head, giddiness, loss of power and tremulous motion of the limbs, sonmolency, dilatation of the pupils, double vision, nausea, and vomiting. After a time these symptoms pass off, leaving the patient merely languid. When a large quantity of the root or leaves has been eaten, an accident which has occurred from the plant having been mistaken for other vegetables, moi-e serious effects are manifested. In addition to the above symptoms in an aggravated form, there will be loss or incoherency of speech, delirium, con- fusion of thought, insensibility, coma, and, sometimes, a state resembling insanity ; the pupils are dilated and insensible to light, there is coldness of the surface, cold perspiration, loss of power in the legs, alternating Avilh tetiinic rigidity and convulsive movements of the muscles, the pulse small, frequent, and irregular, the respiration deep and laborious. (See ' Med. Gaz.' vol. 47, p. 640.) Occasionally there is nausea with vomiting and purging. Death may take place in a few hours or days, according to the severity of the symptoms. The special effect of this poisonous plant is manifested in its tendency to produce a general paralysis of the nervous system. One fatal case of poisoning by the roots of henbane is quoted by Orfila, and another by the leaves is reported by Wibmer (op. cit. p. 147.) The appear- ances consisted in a general congestion of dark-coloured liquid blood in the venous system. The lungs and brain especially manifested this condition. There are commonly no marks of irritation or inflammation in the stomach and bowels. Anali/sis.—When the vegetable hasbsen eaten, it can be identified only by its botanical charac- ters. The seeds are very small and hard ; they are furrowed on the surface, and may be easily confounded with those of belladonna. They are oi' an oblong, oval or pyriform shape. We subjoin illustra- 1 tions, in which they are repre- sented magnified (i) and of their natural size (a). The leaves are peculiar in shape and other cha- racters, by which they may be easily identified. The annexed illustration is fi'om a photograjih of a fresh leaf of henbane. The poisonous properties of henbane are known to be owing to the presence of a crystalline alka- loidal body, which is called IIi/- oscijamia. It is very difficult of extraction. The crystals have a silky lusti-c,_they are not very solu])le in water, but are easily dissolved by alcohol and ether. It has an alkaline reac- tion, and its saline solutions are precipitated by tannic acid. It has an acrid a O «) o. ScO(l« of ITciiliaiiP. (t. Natural sizo. b. Mafjiiifioil ;J0 diameters. Small leaf of HenbaTie of its natural size.


[394/1290 b21964944_0394.jp2]

330 EFFECTS OF LACTUCA AND SOLANU.AI. disafreeahle taste, rcsemblinc; that of tobacco. It is liigbly poisonous, and causes dilatation of the pupils. L.VCTUCARIUM. (LaCTUC.^.) Symptoms and Effects.—Tha two species of lettuce, known under the names of Lactuca sativa "and viiiOSA, contain a principle which is possessed of feebly narcotic properties. Orfila has ibund that the e.xti-act pi-epared by evapora- tion at a low temperature!, acts upon the brain and nervous system of animals; although very large doses were required for the production of narcotic eftects. There is no record of these plants having exerted a poisonous action in tho human subject. The inspissated juice of the lettuce is well known under tin najne of lactucarivm or lettuce-opium. The juice, when it first escapes, is of a nulky-white hue, but, in drying, it forms an extract in small irregular dry masses of a brown colour, a bitter taste, and with an odour similar to that of opimn. It has a weak narcotic action when given in doses of from five to twenty grains. It varies much in strength. AViljmer found tliat tico grains caused headache and somnolency. (Op. cit. 200.) It is bitter to the taste, which appears to be owing to the presence of a bitter principle called lactiici/i, upon which its feebly narcotic properties probably depend. There are no tests for lactucarium, fiu'ther than the colour, the opiate odour with ihe want ol" solu- bility, and the absence of the other chemical characters oi'opium. Nightshade. (Solanum.) Sjpnptoms and Effects.—There are two species of this plant—the Solanvm, Dulcamara, Bitter-sweet or Woodij-nigbtshade, which has a purple flower and bears red berries; and the Solanum Nigrum, or Garden-nightshade, Avith a white flower and black berries. The active principle Solaiiia, on which the poisonous properties of both species depend, varies in proportion at didcrent .seasons of the year. In one instance a decoction of the plant is said to ha\ e produced in a man dimness of sight, giddiness, and trembling of the limbs,—■ symptoms Avhich soon disappeared under slight treatment. (For a case of poisoning by the decoction, see ' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 46, p. 548.) The berries of the Solanum nigrum, in one instance at least, produced serious effects in three children who liad eaten them. They complained of headache, giddiness, sickness, colic, an<l tenesmus. There was copious vomit- ing of a greenish-coloured matter, with thirst, dilated pupils, stertorous breath- ing, convulsions, and tetanic stiffness of the lind^s. One child died in tlie acute stage : the others died apparently from secondary consequences duriiiL;- treatment. (Orfila, op. cit. 4enie ed. 2, 273.) From three to four berries df this plant have been found to produce sleep. In September, 1853, the red berries of the \Vnndi/-nig}itsha<le are stated to have caused the death of a bov. a;t. 4, under the Ibllowing circumstances, lie had eaten some of the berries, and at first did not a]-)pear to suffer from them; but eleven hours afterwaid^ he was attacked Avith vomiting, purging, and convulsions, which continued throughout the day; the child being in.sensible in the intervals. lie died convulsed in about twenty-four hours. The vomited matters were of a dark greenish colour and of a bilious character. Other children had partaken of the berries at the same time: but among these, one only sufiered sli'i-htlv. (' Lancet,' June 28, 1850, p. 715.) ° "


[395/1290 b21964944_0395.jp2]

Sl'INAL POISONS. NUX VOMICA. (SriNAL Poisons.) CHAPTER 28. NUX VOMICA STUYCHNIA—SYMPTOMS AND APl'KAltANCES TIME OF OCCURRENCH OF SYMPTOMS FATAL DOSE PERIOD OF DEATH—CHEMICAL AND MICPtOSCOPICAL ANALYSIS OF NUX VOMICA AND STRYCHNIA TESTS — PROCESS FOll ORGANIC MIXTURES—DETECTION GF STliYCHNIA IN THE TISSUES DUUCIA. Nux Vomica. Strychnia. Nux Vomica in powder has a bitter taste, and cannot therefore be easily administered in a poisonous dose withont exciting suspicion. It owes its poisonous properties to tlie presence of from one to one-half per cent, of the alkaloid strychnia associated with another alkaloid named hrucia. Stiychnia itself has a very bitter taste even in very small quantity: but as it destroys life in a small dose, and it may be given in the form of pills or professedly administered as quinine or other medicines, it offers every fiicility for criminal administration. Siiinptoiiis.—At a variable interval after taking either nux vomica or strychnia in a poisonous dose, the patient experiences a sense of uneasiness and restlessness, accompanied by a feeling of impending suffocation. There is a shuddering or a trembling of the whole frame, with twitchings and jerk- ings of the head and limbs. Tetanic convulsions then commence suddenly with great violence, and nearly all the muscles of the body are simultaneously affected. The limbs are stretched out involuntarily, the hands arc clenched: the head after some convulsive jerkings is bent backwards, and the Avhole of tlie body becomes as stiff as aboard. As the convulsions iijcrease in frequency and severity, the body assumes a bow-like form (opisthotonos), being arched in the back and resting on the head and heels. The head is firmly bent backwards, and the soles of the feet are incurvated or arched and everted, the legs sometimes separated. The abdomen is hard and tense, and the cliest spasmodically fixed, so that resi)iration appears to be arrested. The fiice assumes a dusky, livid or congested appearance, with a drawn, wild or anxious aspect, the eyeballs are prominent and staring, and the lips are livid. The intellect is clear, and the sufferings, during this violent spasm of the voluntary muscles, are severe. The patient in vain seeks for relief in gasping for air and in requiring to be turned over, moved or held. The muscles of the lower jaw, which are the first to be affected in tetanus fi-oin disease, are generally the last to be affected l)y this poison. The jaw is not always fixed during a paroxysm. The patient can fre(piently speak and swallow, and great tliirst has been observed among the symptoms. In some cases of poisoning by nux vomica, the jaw lias been fixed hy nmscular spasm ; but, unlike the lock -jaw of disease, this has come on suddenly in full intensity with tetanic spasms in other muscles, and there have been intermissions which^ are not witnessed in the tetanus of disease. The sudden and universal con- vulsion affecting the voluntary muscles has sometimes been so violent that the patient has been jerked off the bed. After an interval of half a minute to one or two minutes, the convulsions subside, there is an intermission, the patient feels exhausted and is sometimes bathed in perspiration. It has been noticed in some of these cases that the pupils during the ]iai-oxysm are dilated, while in the intermission they are contracted. The pulse during the si)asms is so quick that it can scarcely be counted. Slight causes, such as an attempt to move, a sudden noise, or gently touching the i)arient,


[396/1290 b21964944_0396.jp2]

332 sYMrxoMS of poisoxixg by strychnia. ■will frequently bring on a recurrence of the convulsions. In cases likely to prove I'atal, they rapidly succeed eacli other and increase in severity and dura- tion until at length the patient dies utterly exhausted. The tetanic symptoms produced by stiychnia, when once clearly established, progress rapidly either to death or recovery. The patient is conscious, and the mind is commonly clear to the last. He has a strong apprehension of death. The duration of the case, when the symptoms have set in, is reckoned by minutes, while in the tetanus of disease, Avhen fatal, it is reckoned by hours, da}'s, and even -weeks. As a general statement of the course of these cases of poisoning,—within two hours irom the commencement of the symptoms, the jierson either dies or recovers, according to the severity of the paroxysms and the strength of his constitution. Death sometimc?s takes place in a paroxysm. (See case by Mr. Lawrence, ' Lancet,' June 18G1, p. 572). The time at ivhich the symptoms commence appears from the recorded cases to be subject to great variation. Li poisoning by jiux vomica the symptoms are generally more slow in appearing, than in poisoning liy strychnia. Until they set in suddenly, the patient is capable of walking, talking, and going through his or her usual occupations. In a case which occurred to M. Pellarin, a man swallowed about .300 grains of nux vomica and no sym])toms appeared for two hours. lie died speedily in a violent convulsive fit. (' Ann. clTiyg.' I8G1, vol. 2, p. 481.) Oa an average in poisoning by strychnia the symptoms appear in from five to twenty minutes. In one case convulsions came on in five minutes ('Ann. d'Hyg.' 18G1, vol. 1, p. 13-3). In two cases at least, an hour has elapsed. ('Lancet,'August 31, 1850. ' Oji Poisoning by Strychnia,'185n, p. 131).) In a case which occurred to Drs. Lawrie and Cowan in June 1853, an hour and a half elapsed. In 1848, Dr. Anderson met with an instance in Avhich two hours and a AorZ/'elapsed before the ajDpearance of symptoms. (' Poi- soning by Strychnia,' p. 42.) The longest interval recorded was in the following case:—A boy, a?t. 12, swallowed a pill containing three grains of stiychnia. No symptoms a]:)peared lor three hours; they then set in, in the usual way, and death took place in ten minutes. It w^is clearly proved that the pills taken had been composed of three grains of strychnia with mucilage: they had been pre- pared eight months previousl}' for the piu-pose of poisoning dogs; hence t\wy Avere hard, and underwent only slow solution in the body (' Lancet,' 18G1, vol 2, p. 480). The form in which the poison is administered or applied has a consideral-)le influence on the tinie at which the symptonis commence. Thus when strychnia is given in pills, especially if, as in the above case, they are hard, the symptoms are much longer in appearing tliau when the poison is taken in solution. Mr. Savory gave to a dog two bread pills, each containing one quarter of a "-rain of strychnia. No symptoms of poisoning had occuri-ed at the end of tu-i< hours, but the animal was found dead a short time afterwards. When strychnia was given in solution the symjjtoms soon appeared, and de;itli to(,)k place rapidly. ('Lancet,' 18G3, vol. 1, pp. 515, 548.) It is remarkable that so simi)le a fact connected with the absorption of this poison, should have been Avholly ignored by some of the experts wlio appearecl for the defence ol" William Palmer {Reg. v. Palmer, C. C. C, 185G). Palmer o-ave to the deceased, Cook, two pills containing strj^chnia. No sj'mptoms wcre^ob- served for an hour and a (piarter. More than one expert swore strongly that this interval rendered it impossible that the sym])toms could have been caused 1-y strychnia ! It was fortunate for the ends of justice that tlie jury put no confidence in strong statements thus made without any reasonable amount ol' experience to warrant tliem. The above-mentioned cases Avill show the <> reat danger of trusting to snch dogmatic opinions. ^ If the poison isai)plied to tlie cellular membrane, to an ulcerated or diseased


[397/1290 b21964944_0397.jp2]

AITEAEANCES AFTER DEATH. surface, or even a hcallliy iiuicoiis surface, absorption takes place rap'ullj', ami the interval ibr the production of symptoms is proportionably short. Dr. Schuler relates a case of amaui-osis in Avhich about the 1-12th part of a grain of strychnia was introduced into the punctum lachrymale at the corner of the eye. Three or four minutes had not elapsed when symptoms of poisoning ai>peared. There was convulsive respiration, with violent tetanic shocks, an(i the patient appeared about to die : however, the symptoms passed off, and he recovered. ('Med. Times and Gazette,' July LSGl.) Appearances after Death. Extermtllij,—In general the body is relaxed at the time of death, and stiffens afterwards: but the commencement and dura- tion ol'the rigid state depend on various conditions. In the case of Mrs. Vyse's two children (Rer/.Y. V;isc C.C.C., 1SG2), who died in less than an hour from the effects of Battle's Vermin Killer, administered by the mother, Mr. Savory made the following observation:—He saw the bodies soon after death. They W(>re much discoloured, livid, and although ([uite warm, were perfectly rigid. The younger, aged five yeai's, Avas rigid all over : the elder principally abont the jaws and neighbouring parts. The rigidity gradually disappeared, and after twenty-four hours there Avas scarcely any remaining in the elder child. Decomposition had commenced, the front of the abdomen presenting a green discolouration. The body of a person poisoned by strychnia may therefore be Ibund in a non-rigid state within the ordinary period after death ; but in most re(;ent cases it is not r;nusual to find the hands clenched and the feet arched or turned inwards. In the case of Cook, the rigidity of the limbs, including the hands and feet, is reported to have been well marked when the body Avas disinterred about two months after burial. In other instances of undoubted strych.nia-poisoning no particiilar degree of rigidity has been found at any period after death. In rabbits poisoned by similar doses of strychnia, I have observed the body of one to remain perfectly rigid for a Aveek, Avhile another had lost all rigidity and had begun to puti-efy alter thirty-six hours. The circumstances Avhich alFcct the commencement and duration of this condition of the dead body, have been elsewhere explained (see page 17). Tlie experiments of BroAvn Sequard have conclusively shoAvn that it is not any special influence of the poison on the muscles, but the mode in Avhich it operates on the system, that determines the commencement and duration of rigidity in the dead body. In the accurately observed case recorded by the late Professor Casper, of Berlin (see page 3;J4), the body Avas examined Ibrty-one hours after death. It presented the slight greenish tinge of incipient putrefaction in the loins: there was slight humidity ; the expression of the face Avas that of one quietly sleep- ing the eyes Avere closed, the pujiils neither contracted nor dilated. Eigidity was present in its usual degree for the time of observation—Avell marked as it ahvays is in the masseter muscles by Avhich the jaAvs Avere firmly closed, and more strongly marked in the limbs Avhich Avere lying parallel with the trunk. The feet Avere not incurvated : the fingers .as in other dead bodies Avere half flexed iuAvards, and the nails Avere blue. There was no evidence of tetanic, still less of opistiiotonic stiffness or rigidity of the body. In short, this body Avas externally precisely like a thousand other bodies (' iiusserlich genau wie tausend andre Leichen') Avhich had come beibrc him; and any physician not informed of the mode of death, Avould have had no suspicion Avhatever of death by strychnia from the- external appearances. (See report of this remarkable case revised by Casper Avithin a feAV hours of his OAvn deatli, in Horn's 'Viertel- jahrschrift der gerichtliche Medicin,' Juli 18G4, p. 7.) _ A man Avho clears a.Avay an error in medical jui'isprudence, does as much service to science as he who discovers a neAV truth. Among the internal appearances Avhich have been met Avith in different cases,


[398/1290 b21964944_0398.jp2]

STRYCILMA. AlTEAllA^X'ES AFTER DEATH. are congestion of the membranes and substance of the brain, as also of the Tipper part of tlie spinal marrow, with congestion of the lungs. The heart is contracted and empty ; but its right cavities in some instances have been dis- t(>nded with licpiid blood. The blood has been ibund black and liquid throughout the body. The nuicous membrane of the stomach has occasionally ])resented slight patches of ecchymosed congestion, probably depending on extraneous causes ; such as the ja-occss of digestion—the presence of food — or alcoholic liquids. In most instances the stomach and intestines have been found quite healthy, and it is not in the nature of this poison either to inflame or irritate the mucous membrane. Of the appearances obsei'ved in poisoning by strychnia, there are none which can be considered strictly characteristic. Congestion of the niembranes of the brain and spinal marrow is probably the most common. In a case which occurred to Mr. Startin, a man who had taken strychnia medicinally, died in less than three hours Irom a dose of a grain and a half On inspection, there were extensive patches of extravasalcd blood beneath the arachnoid membi-ane of the lower half of the spinal cord. ('Med. Times and Gazette,' March 21, 1857, p. 297.) AVith regard to the state oi the heart and lungs, their condition as to fulness or emptiness must depend rather on the mode of dying, than on the actual cause producing death. The late Professor Casper of Berlin, who had the largest medico-legal practice in Germany, states that out of nearly 12t)0 medico-legal inspections made by him up to Decendier 10, 18G3, no case of death from strychnia had come before him. At that date he made a careful examination of the body of a man, who had destroyed himself with strychnia, with a view, if possible, of fixing the special appearances produced by this poison, and of isolating them from those casual conditions of the body, which have been Avrongly described as characteristic of the effects of strychnia. On December 10, 18t!o, a healthy man a^t. 30 swallowed at 5 o'clock p.m. from five to six grains of strychnia. For about an hour, he lay in his room quiet. At this time, spasms commenced, and in his attempt to reach a window, he fell and lost all poAver of moving his legs. He was not seen for another hour, when he Avas found on the floor, asking for water. In attempting to raise himself, he Avas seized Avith tetanic convidsions affecting the Avhole of his muscles: he had three of these fits in u severe form, and died in the last at 8.15 p.m. IJiuing the spasms, as Avell as in the intervals, thei-e Avas complete conscioiisness. The external appearances in this case have been already described (p. 330). The two outer mendjranes of the brain Avere filled Avitli blood : Avhich through- out the body was generally fluid as in death from asphyxia—it Avas of a light reddish colour, as in poisoning by carbonic oxide, or prussic acid. The brain and spinal mai'roAv Avere healthy. The muscles of the throat and cullet Avere ol" a dark violet colour, unlike the other muscles of the body. The lungs Avei-e naiuiral—not congested. The right cavities of the heart Avere collapsed and empty, and the left cavities contained but little blood. The large vessels Avcrr also nearly empty. The spleen Avas congested. The stomach was half full ol' a mass of partly digested food: the mucous membrane Avas* pale, firm, not softened,and Avhen minutely examined by a lens, Avas found to be perfectly natural. The mucous membrane of the Avhole of the intestinal canal avrs in the same healthy state. The kidneys were healthy and not congested. The spinal marroAV Avas especially examined throughout its Avhole extent, as Avell as the roots of the spinal nerves. It Avas cut into in various directions : and in no part did it present any appearance deviating from the healthy condition. So far as appearances went, thei-c was no visible cause of death "in the case of an adult, healthy man, dying in less than four hours from a large dose of this power- ful ])oison, and obviously frou) its immediate effects. In this respect, strvchnia


[399/1290 b21964944_0399.jp2]

STRYCHNIA. FATA]. DOSE. resembles other alkaloidul poisons (Horn's ' YierteljulirscluiiV,' Juli 18(14, p. 28.) Casper considers the peculiar colour of the muscles of the throat and gxiUet, as worthy of notice. This wivi the only deviation from the ordinary appear- ances wliich he had been accustomed to meet with incases of violent deatli. li'he had had no previous experience of the condition of the body in deutli from strychnia, he had had, during a long and active life, imsurpassed opportunities of observing the appearances in all other kinds of violent death. He -was thus in a better condition than others, to fix upon any that were really cliarac- teristic of jjoisoning by strychnia. Although the examination of a dead body is thus proved to thi'ow but little light upon the question of death from strychnia, still a medical jurist has in the symptoms, their mode of occiir- rence and progress, sufficient data for a safe opinion. Qnuntitij required to destroi/ Life.—The sixteenth part of a grain of strychnia killed a child between two and three years of age in four hours. In a case by Dr. Danvin, three-i[uarters of a grain killed a child, a?t. 7^, in half an hour. (' Annales d'Hygiene,' 18G1, p. loo.) In two cases of adults, in each of which a quarter of a grain had been taken by mistake, the patients recovered only imder early treatment. ('Lancet,' July 20, 1850, pp. 107, 117.) The smallest iiital dose in an adult was in the case of Dr. Warner. Half a grain of tlie sulphate of strychnia here destroyed life. ('On Poisoning by Strychnia,' })p. 138, l.')9.) So powerful are the elfects of this drug in ecirtain cases, that ordi- nary medicinal doses can scarcely be borne. A gentleman took one-twentieth of a grain of strychnia in six doses during a period of two or three daj's. Severe lits ol" tetanus occurred, although half a grain had not been taken altogether. It is j)robable in such cases that, elimination is either arrested or iniperieetly perlbrmed. In May 1859, Dr. Tweedie informed me of a case in which he had prescribed for a gentleman, pills, each containing l-15th grain of strychnia. He took altogether five of them, or g^rd of a grain at proper intervals. The jjatient was seized Avith the most alarming tetanic convulsions continuing iov .some time. Thei'e Avas also opisthotonos of a severe kind. He only slowly recov(!red. A fatal dose of strychnia for an adult may be assigned at iiom half a grain to two grains. As in other cases of poi-soning, many recoveries have taken i)lace, even afier large doses of strychnia have been taken. There are at least thi-ee instances on record in Avhicli j)er.sons have recovered afber taking one grain. A case of recovery from two to three grains is reported in the ' Lancet' ibr 1801, vol. 2, p. lO'J.) In the same journal, for 18Go, vol. 1, p. 54, Dr. Angell describes a case in which a girl recovered in six or seven hours from a dose o^ four grains of strychnia. When first seen, she was sensible, and while talking was sud- denly seized with the usual tetanic symptoms—opisthotonos, concave contrac- tion of the hands and feet, the muscles rigid, the eyes natural, the pulsations of the heart considerably increased, the respiration difficidt, and great fear of death. She had only three paroxysms, and to this probably her recovery was due, as her system was not exhausted by severe and frequent convulsive at- tacks. There is one instance reported in which a person is said to have re- covered from a dose of seven grains of strychnia (' Med. (iaz.,' vol. 41, p. o()5). In reference to this alleged recovery from large doses, it may be a question whether the strychnia was not mixed with some other substance, whereby its poisonous properties were weakened. Instances of recovery from doses above one or two grains must be regarded as exceptional. With I'espect to nnx vomica, three grains of the alcoholic extract liave de- stroyed life. Tlie smallest tatal dose of the powder was in a case reported by Horfnianii, and (|iiotP(l by Christison (p. '.)<>1), also by Trail ('Outlines," p. i;)7 ). Thiriif ///-a/ns vl' the {lowder, given in two doses ol" fifteen gi-ains each, proved


[400/1290 b21964944_0400.jp2]

STEYCIINIA. DURATION OF THE CASE. 336 fatal. The poison was given by mistake for bark to a patient labouring under quartan fever. This is about equivalent to the Aveight of one full-sized seed, and to only one-third of a grain of strychnia in two doses. The dose of nux vomica required to destroy life became of some importance in Reg. v. Wren (Winchester Spring Assizes, 1851). The prisoner was convicted of an attempt to administer this poison in milk; the quantity separated from the milk amounted to forty-seven grains, which was above a fatal dose. The intense bitterness which the nux vomica gave to the milk led to detection, and this would, in general, be a bar to the criminal administration of the poison, except in the form of extract in pills. Period at ivhich Death takes place.—In fatal cases death generally takes place within two hours after the taking of the strychnia. One of the most rapidly fatal cases recorded is that of Dr. Warner. The symptoms commenced in five minutes, and he was dead in tiventy minutes. In the case of Cook., the symptoms commenced in an hour and a quarter, and he died in twenty minutes. One of the longest cases for duration was communicated to me by Mr. Wilkins. The deceased, an adult, died in six hours from a dose of three grains of strychnia. ('Guy's Hosp. Reports,' Oct. 1857, p. 483.) In poisoning by nux vomica, death usually occurs within tAvo hours; but Dr. Christison mentions a case in which a man died in fifteen minutes after taking a dose (p. 898). This is probably the shortest period known. There are several instcinces of recovery on record, even after large doses. Mr. IlifF has reported a case in which a female reco- vered after taking two drachms of nux vomica. ('Lancet,' Dec. 15, 1840.) Vermin and Insect Killers.—Although it is difficult to procure strychnia at a druggist's shop, it is extensively sold to the public by grocers, oilmen, and others, under the name of Vermin Killers, in threepenny and sixpenny packets. Butler s Vermin-Killer consists of a mixture of Hour, soot, and strychnia. I have found the sixpenny packet to weigh about a drachm, and to contain from two to three grains of strychnia. As the poison is mechanically mixed Avith the other ingredients, and is probably manufactured on a large scale, the pro- portion of strychnia is liable to variation. By the aid of a lens, the poison may be seen scattered in white particles through the coloured powder. The three- penny packet contains aboiit half the quantity of strychnia, but, as it will be seen, quite sufficient to destroy the hfe of an adult. In place of soot, Prussian blue is sometimes used as a colouring substance. Battle's Vermin Killer is a powder .similar to that of Butler, containing a fatal proportion of strychnia, as it is sold in packets. These powders are a fertile source of poisoning either through acci- dent or design : they are openly sold by ignorant people to others still more ignorant. In Reg. v. Vamplcw f Lincoln Autumn Assizes, 18G2), it was proved tliat the prisoner, a girl under 13 years of age (!), had purchased one of these j)owders at a village shop and had destroyed her master's infant with it. There was also reason to believe that this girl had destroyed two infants by similar poisons in two other families where she had acted asntirse. They had all died suddenly in fits! In the above case, I examined a similar powder purchased for threepence at the same shop, and found it to consist of about thirteen grains of flour, coloured with Prussian blue and mixed with three-quarters of a grain of strychnia. Another Battle's powder, purchased in London for threepence, Aveiglied like this about thirteen grains, and a sixpenny packet Aveighed tAventy- three grains. The poison is therefore in a more concentrated form than in Butler's powder. A case in Avhich a young Avoman was killed in two hours by a three- penny packet of this poAvder Avas communicated to me in July, 1864 : and another in Avhich a drachm-packet of Butler's killer destroyed a girl, a>t. 17 in one hour, has been reported by Mr. Saville (' Med. Times and Gaz.,' Nov., 1857 ). It Avould be easy to add to those many other fatal cases Avhich have fallen Avithin my own knowledge; but they present nothing out of the usual course. The


[401/1290 b21964944_0401.jp2]

337 NUX VOMICA. CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. persons have all died under the ordinary symptoms of poisoning by strychnia, in a well-marked form. The appearances in the body are similar to those seen in death from strychnia : bnt there is one caution to be given in reference to the examination of the stomach. As death is commonly rapid and there is no vomiting, the colouring matter, either soot or Prussian blue, should always be sought for in the stomach. Strychnia may or may not be found, according to the amount swallowed and the degree to which absorption has gone on during life. Some cases of recovery are reported. In 1859 a man recovered alter taking a whole packet containing nearly three grains of strychnia (' Ed. Monthly Joiu-nal,' 1859, vol. 2, p. 507); and in 1860, Dr. Part met with an instance of recovery in which a girl took half a packet. In these cases the favourable results were probably due to vomiting excited by emetics. Chemical Anali/sts.—Ntix vomica is well known as a flat round kernel, about the size of a shilling, with radiating silken fibres, slightly raised in the centre. It is of a light brown colour, and covered with a fine silky down. It is very hard, brittle, tough, and difficult to pulverize. The powder is of a grey brown colour, like that of liquorice: it is sometimes met with in a coarsely rasped state: it has an intensely bitter taste. It yields to water and alcohol, strychnia, Hairs of Niix Vomica, magnified 124 diameters. brucia, igasuric or strychnic acid, and some common vegetable principles. Heated on platinum foil, it burns with a yellow smoky flame. Nitric acid turns it of a dark orange-red colour, which is destroyed by chloride of tin. These properties are sufficient to distinguish it from various medicinal powders which it resembles. In one case of poisoning by this substance {Reg. v. Wreti) I found a quantity of guaiacum powder mixed with the nux vomica. This so completely changed the action of nitric acid, as in the first instance to create some difficulty in identifying the substance. The analyst must be pre- pared for these admixtures or adulterations. The aqueous infusion or decoction is reddened by nitric acid, and is freely precipitated by tincture of galls. Persulphate of iron gives with it an olive- green tint. The fine silky fibres or hairs which cover the sui'face of the seed may be obtained by Avashing the residue of the powder in the stomach, or the sediment of any liquid with which the nux vomica may have been mixed. As in other poisonous seeds or roots, the strychnia is slowly removed from the powder by the absorbent vessels of the stomach, and carried into the blood, until that liquid is sufficiently impregnated with the poison to produce symp- toms. The powder itself remains, as it is unalterable by the fluids of the stomach. Strychnia may be extracted from nux vomica by a simple process, which is described at p. 345. Strychnia.—This alkaloid may be readily obtained crystallized from an alcoholic solution. The crystal is very small, and its form is subject to great vaiiation, according to the strength of the solution, rapidity or slowness of


[402/1290 b21964944_0402.jp2]

338 TESTS FOK STRYCHKlA. evaporation, the presence of foreign matters, &c. It is commonly seen in octahedra, sometimes lengthened into prisms of a peculiar shape, bevelled at Fio. 1. Fio. 2. Various forms of Crystals of Stryclmia, Crystals of Strychnia obtained by as they were obtained from an alco- adding ammonia to the sulphate, holic solution. Magnified 124 diame- Magnified 124 diameters, ters. the ends, and crossing each other at angles of 60°. (See Fig. 1.) There are as many as six or eight varieties of crystals, so that too much importance must not be attached to this branch of the analysis. As strychnia is procured from the solutions of its salts by the addition of ammonia, it is usually deposited in long slender prisms. (Fig. 2.) 1. Strychnia is white, of an intensely bitter taste, even Avhen it forms only 1-30,000th part of a solution. 2. When heated on platinum, it melts and bums like a resin, with a black smoky flame; in a close tube it yields am- monia. 3. It is not perceptibly dissolved by cold water : it i-equires 7,000 parts for its solution. 4. It is easily dissolved by acids, and is precipitated from the concentrated solutions by potash, in which it is insoluble. 5. Strong nitric acid imparts to it a reddish colour, owing to the presence of brucia. 6. Sulphuric acid produces no apparent change in it: but when to the mixture a small crystal of bichromate of potash, of ferricyanide of potassium, or a small . quantity of black oxide of manganese or of peroxide of lead is added, a series ; of beautiful blue, purple, and violet colours appear, which pass rapidly to a i light flesh-red tint. Among these substances black oxide of manganese will be ? found preferable. By reason of its insolubility, it imparts no colour to the ? liquid if strychnia is absent; and if the alkaloid is present it slowly brings out t the colours, so that there is time to make full obsei-vation. Permanganate off potash has been recommended as a substitute for the oxide, but it is objec-- tionable on account of its solubility, and of its being already coloured. Dr.-. Letheby has suggested the use of a small galvanic battery for the productiono of the coloured reaction. In this case sulphuric acid only is required. It.l presents no practical advantage over the use of manganese. The salts of strychnia are very soluble in water, and these solutions give crystalline precipitates, with a large number of substances. The alkalies and alkaline carbonates, if diluted, precipitate the alkaloid in slender prisms (see Fig. 2). The sulphocyanide of potassium, ferricyanide of potassium, nitro- prusside of sodium, and chromate of potash furnish with it well-defined pris- matic crystallizations. In the latter case the crystals are stellated and of a yellow colour. Two of these groups will be found delineated in the annexed illustrations. (Figs. 3 and 4.) Mr. Horsley has suggested that a solution of strychnia should be sufEcientl) concentrated, and then precipitated by chromate of potash : the crystals ma} be examined microscopically, and afterwards, on being touched with strono- sul phuric acid, the colour reactions are at once brought out.


[403/1290 b21964944_0403.jp2]

CRYSTALLINE FORMS OF SALTS OF STRYCHNL\. 339 Strychnia has been fatally mistaken for santonine, salicine, and jalapine, and has caused death on several occasions. Jalapine does not crystallize, and the Fig. 3. Fig, 4, Crystals of Sulphocyanate of Strych- Crystals of Cliromate of Strychnia nia magnified 124 diameters. magnified 24 diameters. crystalline forms of santonine and salicine are, as it will be seen by the annexed illustrations, very different from those of strychnia. Fig. 5. Fig. 6. Crystals of Salicine magnified 124 Crystals of Santonine magnified 124 diameters. diameters. These two vegetable principles differ from strychnia in their properties. When heated in close tubes, they give off acid vapours. Salicine is soluble in water. Santonine is not soluble in water, but is dissolved by alcohol. Tannic acid and the chloriodide of potassium and mercury do not precipitate the solutions, while they readily precipitate those of strychnia. Nitric acid has no effect upon either, while sulphuric acid, which does not change santonine, gives a pink red colour to salicine. The crystals of santonine closely resemble (in microscopical appearance) those of salicine, but they are distinguished from sjilicine and other alkaloids and principles by acquiring a brilliant yellow colour on exposure to sunlight, without undergoing any change of form. In Organic Mixtures, the process originally suggested by Stas is generally preferred for the separation of this poison. The principle of^ its operation consi.sts in dissolving the strychnia by a gentle heat out of the tissue or organ finely cut up, by means of rectified spirit mixed with a small quantity of acetic acid. The liquid is strained, and the residue well pressed and washed with alcohol: the acid solution of strychnia thus obtained is concentrated in a water- bath at a low temperature. The concentrated liquid is neutralized by potash, and a slight excess of alkali is added. The alkalized liquid is then shaken in a long stoppered tube, with twice its volume of ether, or a mixture consisting of two parts of ether and one of chloroform. These liquids dissolve the


[404/1290 b21964944_0404.jp2]

340 STRYCHNIA. DETECTION IN ORGANIC LIQUIDS. strychnia set free by tlie alkali. The ethereal solution is separated from the watery liiiuid by a pipette, and submitted to spontaneous evaporation, when, if strychnia is present, the alkaloid will be obtained, but generally associated with oily and other organic matters, which interfere Avith the production of crystals. The impure residue left by the ether is heated in a water-bath, with a few drops of strong sulphuric acid : this destroys the organic matter. Water is added, and the acid liquid is filtered through paper, neutralized by potash, and again treated with ether, when strychnia will be obtained in small and slender prisms. The crystals, afler an examination by the microscope (see Fig. 2, p. 338), are treated with sulphuric acid and peroxide of manganese, and the colour reactions of strychnia, if the alkaloid is present, will ai)pear. By this process, I have detected strychnia in the liver of a jDerson who died from this poison, although the organ was in a highly putrescent state. Strychnia is not separated from its salts by ether : hence this liquid may be first employed for removing such organic matters as are soluble in ether • before neutralizing the liquid with potash. By this expedient, the strychnia may be obtained in a mtich greater state of purity in the first evaporation. The reader will find a full account of the processes for strychnia in or- ganic solids and liquids in some valuable papers published by Dr. Wormley,, in the ' Ohio Medical Journal,' January 1864, p. 19, and March 1864, p. 119. This gentleman describes a case in which, from a misapplication of the pro- cess, strychnia was sworn to be present, when, from the chemical method pursued, the alkaloid could not possibly have been separated; and two instances have fallen within my own knowledge recently, where the colours produced 1 by sulphuric acid and bichromate of potash, on the concentrated and dry organic contents of the stomach, were referred to strychnia, when they were really due to the decomposition of the salt employed. The detection of this- poison in the stomach or the tissues, will depend on the same conditions as> those observed in other cases of poisoning. If a person takes a large dose and dies quickly, a residuary portion may be readily found. In Reg. v. Burke,, (Clonmel Summer Assizes, 1862), the prisoner administered strychnia to his wife in Epsom salts. She died in about half an hour under the usual symp- toms. Dr. Blyth extracted more than three grains of the poison from the( contents of the stomach. If a small dose has been taken, and the person has survived some hours, it is probable that none will remain in the stomach. AA decomposed state of the viscera and their contents does not appear to interferes with the detection of this poison. It has been suggested that the presence oh morphia counteracts the colour tests : but luiless in admixture with th<* strychnia in large proportion, this is not probable. Besides, in Stas's procesai the morphia is not dissolved by the ether. Persons may die from strychnia, and no trace of the poison be found in th& body. In a case of poisoning by this alkaloid, which Avas the subject of a tria* for murder at Perry Co. Pa., in the April term of 1861, Dr. Eeese, of Phila- delphia, made separate analyses of the contents of the stomach and the content of the intestines, as well as of the tissues, and each one of these was repeatec a second time, to avoid all possible error. Yet there Avas no evidence of tin presence of strychnia by the bitter taste of the final extract, or by the colon! tests. The witness, by a comparative experiment, satisfied himself that lit could detect the half-millionth of a grain. (' Amer. Jour. Med. Sci.' Oct. 1861.' In Dr. Reese's case, the quantity taken was unknown, the woman lived five oi six hours, and the body was not examined until six weeks after death, J* small dose and the duration of the case, will suflftciently account for the ne- gative results, without resorting to any other hypothesis. When death has been caused by small doses applied under the skin it i- not likely that the poison will be found in the tissues. The followinfr ex'peri


[405/1290 b21964944_0405.jp2]

341 DETECTION OB^ STRYCHNIA IN ORGANIC SOLIDS. ment was pei-formed in May, 1864. One eighth gf a grain of acetate of strychnia in coarse powder was placed in the cellular membrane of the neck of a rabbit. In nine minntes the animal was seized with a sudden convulsion and fell on its side : its fore and hind legs were rigidly stretched out, and its body passed into a state of opisthotonos. It had a succession of fits, and died in one of them in twenty minutes after the commencement of the symptoms. One half of the powdered acetate was still found in the wound, showing that the rabbit had been killed by the 1-16th of a grain. Of course the residuary strychnia Avas easily detected in the wound : it was plainly visible to the eye. On applying Stas's process to the heart, with the blood and the liver, the tests failed to indicate the slightest trace of the alkaloid. The ethereal liquid left no crystalline residue of any kind. This result does not show that strychnia is not absorbed, but it proves that under certain conditions it cannot be detected in the oigans of the body, in cases in which, beyond all doubt, it has destroyed life. In instances in which death has been caused by nux vomica, which contains only one per cent, of the poisonous alkaloid, so far as I know, strychnia has not been found deposited in the tissues. The following case, which occurred at Liverpool, in April, 1864, of which the particulars have been communicated to rae by Dr. J. B. Edwards, shows the rapidity with which the poison may be diffused and deposited in the tissues, when a large dose has been taken. A strong healthy man, ^t. 43, placed upon his dry tongue, at 10 p.m., a powder which contained six grains of Dover's powder audi five grains of strychnia (dispensed by mistake for five grains of James's powder). He complained of a bitter taste, asked for an orange, and he found, on sucking this, that it increased the bitterness—the acid juices of the orange instantly dis.solved the strychnia, and thus favoured its early absorption. In fifteen minutes he went to bed—twitchings of the muscles then came on, and the patient, from previous experience in taking strychnia as a medicine, Avas fully aware of the cause of the symptoms. He complained of his bowels being drawn up; he drew his knees up as if to his mouth, gave a yell, seized a fi-iend who was standing by, and became appa- rently unconscious (exhausted) for about five minutes. He then revived, but in a few minutes was again seized Avith a violent convulsion of a tetanic character, and he died in tAvo or three minutes afterwards, a little over half an hour after taking the powder. Owing to a spasmodic closure of the jaws, he Avas able to speak only for a few minutes at a time; he Avas rational, but seemed to be in great terror. An inspection Avas made thirty-six hours after death, Avhen the body was found to be unusually Avarm. The back and loAver parts Avere much discoloured, but the discolouration was easily removed by pres- sure, indicating a fluid state of the blood. The lower jaw was slightly draAvn up, the body straight, not arched; the fingers slightly flexed, not clenched; the thumbs were fixed, but not bent into the palms of the hands. On opening the head, the scalp Avas found very much gorged Avith fluid blood. The mem- branes of the brain Avere also much congested, as Avell as the blood-vessels of the brain generally. 'J'here Avas no clot or coagulum, but a quantity of serous fluid escaped from the surface. There Avas no softening of the sub- stance of the brain or spinal cord. The lungs Avere healthy, but dark coloured from engorgement Avith blood; the heart Avas empty, its structure was soft; the liver was healthy, the spleen was gorged with fluid blood; the kidneys A\-ere congested. The other organs presented no appearance calling for notice. By cheniical analysis. Dr. Edwards found strychnia in the stomach, the quantity being estimated at about one grain. He also found the poison in the tongue and the liver. He sent to me a portion of the liver, one kidney, and six ounces of blood. They were in a putrescent state, and, Avhen examined about three months afler death, eight ounces of the liver yielded,


[406/1290 b21964944_0406.jp2]

342 NON-DETECTION OF STRYCHNIA IN THE BODY. by the process above described, prismatic crystals of stryclmia, producing the usual colour-reactions with sulphuric acid, and peroxide of manganese, as well as with bichromate of potash. The quantity of strychnia thus obtained was small. The kidney and the blood did not give results on which any reliance could be placed. This case shows that a large dose of strychnia rendered soluble will destroy life in half an hour—that in this short time, four-fifths may be removed from the stomach, or at least not be discoverable there by careful chemical analysis after death—that in half an hour the poison may be distributed through the body and deposited in the soft organs, although no satisfactory evidence of its presence could be obtained from less than half a pound of animal matter. The strychnia found in the tongue was probably a portion of the powder which still remained there. It may be further remarked that, although deceased took in the James's powder 6-lOths of a gi-ain of opium, no morphia was present in the crystalline residue obtained from the liver. (For numerous additional facts and cases connected with this question, see ' Guy's Hospital Reports,' Oct. 1856, p. 326, and ' On Poisons,' 2nd edit. 1859, pp. 70 and 788.) If strychnia has been administered in/>?7/s and, after death, the stomach has been cut open and the contents lost, there will be little hope of discovering the poison, although in Recj. v. Palmer (C. C. C, May 1856) some experts affirmed that this state of things would not materially interfere with the chemical process for its detection ! The diffusion of the contents of this organ through the whole of the small and large intestines and their feculent fluids Avas treated as a comparatively unimportant matter, only creating delay in obtaining the results ! It need hardly be observed that these are speculative opinions, and that the experts who uttered them, had never met with or seen a case by which they could be fairly tested. In those inspections in which there has been such criminal interference or culpable neglect, as in that of,/. P. Cook, the only course for the analyst is to seek for the poison in the tissues. This case, concerning which so much has been said and written in utter ignorance of the scientific facts, settled nothing in reference to the presence or absence of strychnia in the body of a person poisoned by this substance. Except the actual removal of the stomach itself, everything had been done which possibly could be done in order to render any chemical analysis utterly fruitless. It cannot therefore be taken as a fair precedent in any sense for the results of a proper medico-legal research in poisoning by strychnia. The greatest reproach on Dr. Rees and myself would have been that we should have detected strychnia . under circumstances in Avhich any honest and unprejudiced analyst would have pronounced its detection next to impossible. It is satisfactory to find that a . correct view of this remarkable case, and its true bearings on science, are • now showing themselves among continental jurists. In an analysis of it, by' the late Professor Casper (Horn's ' Vierteljahrschrift,' Juli 1864, p. 26), not only ' are the chemical results regarded as negative, by reason of the mismanage- • ment of the inspectors, but the post-mortem appearances themselves, for a i similar reason, are considered as throwing no light iipon the effects of strychnia on the body. The active co-operation of a professional poisoner, at the examination of the body of his victim, is an exceptional circumstance, even for the liberal customs of this country. It was only the natural course of things that attempts were actually made to defeat a chemical analysis, but when such attempts have proved successful, it is not usual to find scientific wit- nesses actively struggling for the lionour of defending a criminal, not because the deceased did not die from poison, but because it was not chemically detected in his body. Assuming that there had not been this criminal inter- ference with the dead body on the part of Palvicr, the position assumed—that strychnia, if a cause of death, must always, and under all circumstances, be


[407/1290 b21964944_0407.jp2]

343 ALLEGED DETECTION OF STRYCHNIA. found in the dead body, is iintrae. Its detection in the body, properly veri- fied, is a proof that it has been taken ; the symptoms in their commencement, pi'ogress, and termination, furnish irrefragable proof that it has acted as a poison; but its non-detection does not prove that it has not destroyed life, or, in the words of Casper, ' Das Nichtauffinden des Giftes allein kann aber niemals einen Gegenbeweis abgehen.'' [For a more complete history of the medical facts in the case of Cook, I must refer the reader to a paper on ' Poisoning by Strychnia,' ' Guy's Hospital Reports,' October 1856. The most able legal analysis of it by any English writer Avhich I have seen, has been published by Mr. J. F. Stephen, in his * General View of the Criminal Law of England,' 1863, p. 357. Of the foreign reports, one by M. Tardieu, in the ' Ann. D'Hygiene'for 1856,2, 371, and 1857, 1, 132, and the other by Professor Casper in Horn's ' Vierteljahrschrift fiir ger. Medicin,' &c., 1864, 2, p. 1, are the most correct in their medical and medico- legal details.] In the recent case examined by Casper (p. 334) the deceased admitted that he had taken between five and six grains of strychnia. He lived three hours and a half, and on analysis Dr. Sonnenschein procured from the stomach three {^ains of the poison. He did not, however, succeed in extracting any from the blood or tissues. (See case, loc. cit.) It is impossible to pass from the subject of the detection of this poison without referring to cases in which it is stated that it has been found in 'traces' in the body, when there have been no symptoms of poisoning, and, so far as evidence has been produced, nothing inconsistent with death from natural causes. However confident a man may be in the results obtained by chemical tests applied to quantities of matter too small to be estimated by weight, he is venturing on highly dangerous ground if, in the absence of the usual symptoms, and adversely to those which are in evidence, he bases an opinion of death from strychnia upon such microscopic results. The case of a woman named Thomas {Reg. v. Jane Thomas^ Pembroke Lent Assizes 1863) is in this respect of great interest. The prisoner was charged with the murder of her illegitimate infant by administering to it strychnia. The child had had ordinary convul- sions and had died suddenly. No immediate cause of death was apparent to the medical man on an examination of the body. The chemical investigation was made by a gentleman, not a member of the medical profession, and therefore unable properly to appreciate the relative value of symptoms and appearances in throwing a light upon the cause of death. He is, however, well known as an analyst, and no doubt acted bond fide upon a purely chemical view of the case. The following is an extract from a copy of his deposition on which the woman was committed for murder :—' On examining the stomach and intestines, I found they Avere inflamed in patches—the stomach to a moderate extent, and the duodenum to a greater extent. I found on analysis that there was no metallic or mineral poison present: the nature of the inflammation induced me to examine them for strychnine, and upon treating the contents of the stomach and part of the liver by analysis, I found in them traces of strychnine. . . . Taking all the circumstances together, I have no doubt that the child died from strychnine in some form or other. I have heard the evidence of the other witnesses (Hannah Davies and Ann Thomas) read, and am more convinced of my opinion. The rigidity might have gone off three days after death!' As this deposition bears the signature of the chemical witness, there can be no doubt that this was the evidence which he was prepared to give on the trial for murder. The deposition of Hannah Davies was to the effect, that when she was called to the child, it had just died in the lap of Ann Thomas, the grandmother. She did not see the child move. It Avas a small cliild and had had a convidsive fit, and turned purple three days after its birth:


[408/1290 b21964944_0408.jp2]

344 ALLEGED DETECTION OF STRYCHNIA. it frequently vomited up the milk : it had only the milk and biscuits for itA food. Ann Thomas, the grandmother, stated that she Avas called by her daughter, the prisoner, to the child. She took it in her lap; its breathnig Avas short, and it died in her lap. It Avas not a healthy child : there Avas a rash about it from the time of its birth. For three days before its death it refused the breast and would suck very little. ' There Avere spots like bladders on its face. It had only one Jit ! The child's face had been swelling a couple of days before his death. The body was stiff immediately after the breath lefl the body, but I do not recollect whether the hands Avere closed or open. The child Avas lying straight across my lap Avhen it died.' The statement of the prisoner (Jane Thomas) Avas as folloAvs:—' Only mother (Ann Thomas) and I fed the child. I Avas the only person that nursed and dressed it from tAVO days old. The child had the biscuit Avhen it Avas a day or tAvo old ; he thrcAV it up, and I left it off. It Avas fed Avith milk from my breast afterAvards.' The chemical analysis shoAved that there was farinaceous food (biscuit) and milk in the stomach of deceased. To those acquainted Avith the operation of strychnia on the body, it Avill be apparent that there is not a single circumstance in this case indicative of the action of the poison. There Avas only one fit—a common convulsive fit, such as that to Avhich weak and unhealthy infants are frequently liable. The mode of death, as described by the Avitnesses, is not consistent with death from strychnia. The body Avas stiff not before but immediately after death. This infant, Avhich Avas iinhealthy from its birth, obviously suffered from ordinary convulsions, and died from debility and exhaustion. With regard to the in- flammation (!) of the stomach and duodenum, if really present, this could have had no connection with death from strychnia, but must have depended on another cause. Further, unless all experience respecting the action of strychnia on human beings, Avhether infants or adults, and on young animals, is to be set aside for the sake of certain chemical colour-tests, it is quite clear that there could have been no ' traces' of this poison either in the contents of the stomach or in the liver, and that an undue confidence in chemical reactions had led to a serious error. It was a fortunate circumstance for the accused that the Grand Jury threw out the bill against her. From this and other instances in Avhich strychnia is stated to have been present, Avhen all the facts, pathological and chemical, Avere opposed to the statement, it is impossible to aA'oid the conclusion that innocent persons are exposed to great peril from erroneous accusations. In no case of alleged death from strychnia Avoiild it be safe to trust to chemical evidence of ' traces,' unless these results were most strongly supported by the symptoms preceding death, or by experiments Avith the matters extracted, on the bodies of animals. The chemical witness Avho stated that he had detected ' traces' of strychnia in the contents of the stomach and in the liver of Jane Thomas's child, gave strong evidence for the defence in Reg. v. Palmer (1856), and professed his ability to discover the presence of strychnia in any body into Avhich it had been introduced as a poison. He had found it in the blood and in a small part of the liver of a dog poisoned by it; and he also said he could detect the fifty-thousandth part of a grain, if it were unmixed loith orr/anic ^natter. (Case of Palmer, Stephen's ' VieAv of Criminal Law of England,' p. 385.) He has noAv lived to prove that strychnia, or something resembling it, can be detected in cases in Avhich there is no reason to believe it is present. In Thoma«'s case there Avas no evidence of the administra- tion, or even the possession or purchase of poison ; the symptoms precedin"' death Avere Avholly inconsistent Avith strychnia-poisoning, and, at the sjuiie time, quite consistent Avith death from natural causes. One other point here calls for notice, because it shows the great danf^er


[409/1290 b21964944_0409.jp2]

STRYCHNIA IN ORGANIC SOLIDS. BRUCIA. 345 Avliich may arise from a Criminal Court receiving medical evidence from one not trained by a medical education to observe the appearances in the dead body. The stomach and intestines of the deceased child Avere stated to have been vijiamed in patches, and the nature of the injlammation induced the witness to examine the parts for strychnia. It is not the action of strychnia to produce inflammation of the stomach and bowels. No pathologist has ever seen or described this as an effect of strychnia on the body. In Casper's case (p. 334), in which a man took a dose of strychnia large enough to destroy a hundred infants, the stomach and boAvels were in their natural condition ! The slight patches of congestion or injection, sometimes described as being found in the stomach, are frequently the result of digestion going on at the time of death. If the mucous membrane of the stomach and duodenum was really inflamed in this case, it pointed rather to the effect of an irritant substance than of strychnia. (See Casper, loc. cit. p. 24.) The case of Thomas, viewed in all its aspects, clearly leads to one of two conclusions: 1, either that persons may die from strychnia, and no symptoms be produced to indicate poisoning; or, 2, that chemical evidence of traces in a dead body may be sometimes based upon delusive results. There will be no difficulty in deciding which is the more probable, or the safer con- clusion to adopt. A similar case in reference to the alleged death of an infant from arsenic, in which the lives of two innocent persons, a mother and grandmother, were imperilled by an exclusive reliance on chemical evidence, was tried before the late Baron Piatt. {Reg. v. Dore and Spry, Central Criminal Court, August 1848. See ' On Poisons,' 2nd ed., p. 226.) The learned judge, on hearing the evidence for the pro.secution, indignantly directed the accused, a mother and daughter indicted for murdering the infant of the latter, to be discharged, without calling upon them for a defence. The child had died from intussus- ception of the bowels; and the arsenic had been administered to the infant in mistake for calomel by a medical practitioner, shortly before its death ! Strychnia in Organic Solids.—From the Vermin-killers of Butler and Battle, the strychnia may generally be readily separated by means of alcohol, and procured in a crystalline form for the application of tests. The following process I have found to be preferable for the detection of strychnia and brucia in nux vomica:—Digest the powder in a small quantity of diluted sulphuric acid by a water-bath heat. The substance should be well stirred with the diluted acid, which, after a short time, completely carbonizes it. The mass is heated to dryness, then treated with a small quantity of distilled water and filtered, by which an acid liquid of a pale sherry colour is obtained. On neutralizing this liquid with potash, and agitating it with two volumes of ether, the strychnia is separated, and may be obtained crystallized by the evaporation of the ethereal solution. Ten grains of nux vomica=to 1-lOth grain of strychnia, gave satisfactory residts. Prismatic crystals were procured which gave the appropriate reactions Avith the colour tests. Brucia Avas also detected by the action of nitric acid on the crystals. In cases in Avhich the poison is contained in pills or powders, having much organic matter soluble in alcohol, it will be advisable to employ either dilute or concentrated sulphuric acid. It is a remarkable fact that strychnia itself is not acted on in the same degree by sulphuric acid as organic matter, or even other poisonous alkaloids. Brucia. Brucia is an alkaloid generally associated Avith strychnia. It is contained in the seeds of nux vomica, and more abundantly in the bark of tlie tree. It is not so poAverful a poison as strychnia, but the symptoms which it produces


[410/1290 b21964944_0410.jp2]

346 POISOXIXG BY HEMLOCK. are similar. It is considered to have about one-sixth of the strengtli of strychnia. It is not affected by the colour- tests employed for the detection of strychnia, and it acquires an intense red colour on the addition of nitric acid. It is more soluble in water than strychnia, and has a bitter taste. Hydrochloric and iodic acids produce in it no change, either in the cold or when heated. Sulphuric acid gives to it a pink red colour without carbonising it. The sulphate of brucia crystallises in Avell-defined prisms truncated at the ends. They are larger and longer than the prisms of strychnia. Crystals of Sulphate of Brucia, magnified J 24 diameters. (Cerebeo-Spinal Poisons.) CHAPTER 29. conium maculatum. hemlock—conia—cenanthe crocata—^thusa cynapium aconite or monkshood. aconitina. Common or Spotted Hemlock. (Conium Maculatum.) This is a well-known hedge-plant, Avhich grows abtmdantly in most parts of Great Britain, Its poisonous properties reside in the seeds, leaves, and roots. Si/mpfo7ns and Effects.—The effects produced by hemlock have not been uniform; in some instances there have been stupor, coma, and slight convul- sions ; while in other cases, the action of the poison has been chiefly manifested on the spinal marrow—i.e. it has produced paralysis of the muscular system. A man ate a large quantity of hemlock-plant, by mistake for parsley. In from fifteen to twenty minutes there Avas loss of power in the lower extremities: but he apparently suffei-ed no pain. In walking, he staggered as if he was drunk; at length his limbs refused to support him, and he fell. On being raised, his legs dragged after him, and when his arms were lifted, they fell like inert masses, and remained immovable. There was perfect paralysis of the upper and loAver extremities within tAvo hours after he had taken the poison. There Avas loss of poAver of deglutition, and a partial paralysis of sensation, but no convulsions, only slight occasional motions of tlie lefl leg; the pupils Avere fixed. Three hours after eating the hemlock, the respiratory movements had ceased. Death took place in three hours and a quarter; it Avas evidently caused by gi-adual asphyxia from paralysis of the muscles of respiration; but the intellect was perfectly clear until shortly before death. On inspection, there Avas slight serous effusion beneath the arachnoid membrane. The substance of the brain Avas soft; on section there were numerous bloody points, but the organ Avas otherwise healthy. The lungs Avere gorged Avith dark fluid blood; the heart was soft and flabby. The stomach contained a green-coloured pulpy mass resembling parsley. The mucous coat Avas much congested, especially at its greater end. Here there were numerous extravasations of dark blood below the membrane, over a space of about the size of the hand. The intestines Avere healthv, here and there presenting patches of congestion in the mucous coat. The blood, throughout the body, Avas fluid and of a dark colour. A portion of the green vegetable pulp Avas identified by Dr. Christison, as part of the


[411/1290 b21964944_0411.jp2]

347 BOTANICAL AND CHEMICAL ANALYSIS. leaves of the Coniiim viaculatum. Some of the leaves bruised in a mortar with a solution of potash, gave out the peculiar odour of the alkaloidal principle, conia. ('Ed. Med. and S. J.' July 1845, 169.) In a case which occuiTed to myself, which was the subject of a trial for murder {Reg. v Botryer, IpsAvich Summer Assizes, 1848), the child died in one hour after swallowing part of a teacupful of a decoction of hemlock, alleged to have been administered by the mother. The child sipped the decoction, until it lost the power of holding the cup; it became insensible and paralyzed, and died in the chair in a sitting posture. There were no morbid appearances, and no hemlock leaves were found in the body, these having subsided in the cup, and being left in the dregs. The child had been poisoned by the upper stratum of clear liquid. The mother was acquitted for want of proof, the death of the child having taken place in secrecy. Analysis.—Hemlock is known I'rom most other plants which resemble it by its large round smooth stem, with dark purple spots. The leaves are of a dark-green colour, and smooth and shining. Every portion of the plant has a peculiar and disagreeable smell when bruised, resembling cat's urine, or, according to some, the odour of mice. It is strongly brought out when the stem, leaves, or seeds are rubbed with a solution of caustic potash. We subjoin an illustration of the seeds of hemlock, which are peciUiar in their form, and are easily dis- tinguished from the seeds of other umbelliferous plants. A person may be poisoned by a decoction of leaves of hemlock, and no leaves be found in the stomach or bowels (case of Bowyer, supra). In this case the stomach had been emptied, and the contents lost, before it was sent to me ! No tiace of conia was found. The prisoner first gathered the Anthriscus sylvestris by mistake for Conivm maculahim,hut it was proved that she had afterwards gathered the leaves of hemlock. A leaf of each of these plants was copied by photo- graphy, and produced as evidence in Court. As the detei-mination of the presence of fragments of leaves in poisoned liquids, and in the contents of a stomach, may be of importance as evidence, we subjoin an illustration of hemlock leaves, engraved from a photo- graph of the living plant. The appearance and smell of the leaves, either when bi-uised or when rubbed with a solution of potash, will greatly aid a medical Avitness in form- ing a judgment, as there are many um- bellifera; which bear a close resemblance to hemlock in the form of their leaves. Among these, however, it is impossible to rank common parsley. It is hardly credible that a mistake of this kind should he made, yet through carelessness and ignorance accidents may occur. In August, 1864, a lady and two of her children, re siding in the neighbourhood of Liverpool, were seized with symptoms of poisoning soon after dinner. The medical gentlemen who were called in examined the remains of some soup which liad been eaten for a Seed of Hemlock, natural size, ft The same, magnified 30 diameters, c Group of Seeds. Leaf of Common Hemlock.


[412/1290 b21964944_0412.jp2]

348 HEMLOCK. PROPERTIES OF CONIA. dinner, and they detected fragments of the leaves of hemlock amongst the herbs which had been used to flavour the soup. Under treatment, the symptoms abated in a few hours, but they did not entirely recover until after two or three days. It turned out that the hemlock had been gathered in the garden belonging to the family, where it was growing side by side with parsley. As the parsley was raised from seed, it is probable that hemlock seed had been accidentally mixed with it by the seedsman, and thus the accident had occurred. We subjoin an illustration from a photograph of a Leaves of Garden Parsley, from a photograph. leaf of parsley; also illustrations of the seeds, by which the differences between hemlock and parsley will be at once apparent. CoNiA.—The alkaloid of hemlock is known under the names of conia, conein, conicine, and conicina. It resembles nicotina and ammonia in its liquidity, volatile reaction, and in some of its chemical properties. It is a liquid of oily consistency, of a pale yellow colour, powerfully alkaline, and has, when its vapour is diluted, a smell resembling that of mice, and an acrid bitter taste. It gives a volatile greasy stain to paper, and burns with a yellow flame and thick smoke. 1. It is not coloured or aliected by nitric, sulphuric, or hydrochloric acid; the last-mentioned acid produces with it, dense white fumes of hydrochlorate of conia, and on heating the mixture, this salt remains in prismatic crystals. 2. It is not dissolved by water, but floats on it in oily globules. 3. It is soluble in alcohol and ether, and this last-mentioned liquid removes it from its aqueous solution, and leaves it in oily globules on evapora- tion. 4. It gives a Avhite precipitate with corrosive sublimate, and a yellow precipitate with arsenio-nitrate of silver. 5. It precipitates hroAvn oxide of silver from the nitrate: this is not dissolved by an excess, but the oxide is blackened and reduced. 6. Iodine water gives a reddish brown precipitate, which is redissolved ; an excess of iodine water causes a yellowish precipitate. 7. It gives a yellow crystalline precipitate with chloride of gold, but no precipitate with chloride of platinum. 8. Tannic acid precipitates it of a dingy white. 9. Gallic acid gives no precipitate, but slowly acquires a yellowish colour. Its odour and insolubility in water, as well as several of the characters above mentioned, serve to distinguish it from nicotina and ammonia ; but it may be readily separated from ammonia by the chloriodide of potassium and mercury, which precipitates it even more completely than tannic acid. Conia discharges the colour of a solution of permanganate of potash more readily than ammonia, but more slowly than nicotina. In reference to its presence in organic mixtures, it may be detected by its peculiar odour, or by distilling the liquid with a solution of potash and examining the distillate. The reactions produced by tests on small quantities should be distrusted,


[413/1290 b21964944_0413.jp2]

WATER HEMLOCK. (ENANTHE CROCATA. 349 unless there is strong corroborative evidence of the action of the poison on the body from the symptoms. As in reference to strychnia, an incautioiis operator may readily come to the conclusion that he has found ' traces,' and ascribe death to the poison. A case referred to under strychnia (page 343) had its parallel in Germany a few years since. A man died very suddenly, i.e. in two hours and a half after going to bed, and it was alleged that his wife had poisoned him. The persons commissioned to make the analysis deposed that they had found traces of conia in the stomach, intestines, and kidneys, and they came to the conclusion that the man had died from the effects of hemlock, which implicated his wife in a charge of murder. Some doubt appears to have arisen in the minds of the authorities on this point, and they submitted three questions for the consideration of a Medical college. 1. Is there any reason to doubt whether conia has really been found in the body of deceased ? 2. If existing in the body, may it have been spontaneously produced, or does it show administration from without? Does its detection in the body incon- testably prove that the deceased died from poisoning by conia or hemlock ? 3. Is it improbable that deceased poisoned himself with hemlock ? The College decided that there was not sufficient evidence to show that death had been caused by hemlock. The matter was then referred to Mitscherlich and Casper, of Berlin, and they found that the chemical processes pursued, failed to detect conia in the body—that there was nothing to indicate that deceased had taken hemlock or conia in any form, and that the state of the windpipe sufficiently accounted for the sudden death of deceased. He had eaten and drunk freely, had vomited after going to bed; a portion of the food had entered the trachea and had suffocated him ! (See Casper's ' Vierteljahrschrift/ 1859, p. 194). Water-Hemlock. (Cicuta Virosa.) The water-hemlock has given rise to several fatal accidents—its roots having been mistaken for parsnips. The whole of the plant is poisonous; but the roots are the most active, especially when gathered early or late in the year. Symptoms and Effects.—The symptoms produced by the roots are giddiness, dimness of sight, headache, and difficulty of breathing. There is burning pain in the stomach, with vomiting, and these symptoms are accompanied by heat and dryness of the throat. Convulsions have been obsei-ved to precede death. In the cases of three children who died in convulsions from this poison, Mertz- dorfF found an injected state of the raucous membrane of the stomach, with redness of the air-passages, as well as of the cardia, and pylorus; the vessels of the brain and the sinuses were tilled with dark liquid blood. (AVibmer,' Cicuta,' 119.) In a fatal case which occurred toWepfer, the patient, a man, a?t. 20, who had eaten a large quantity of the root, was found with his face swollen and his eyes projecting. He breathed with great difficulty, Seed of Cicuta Virosa mag- and foamed at the mouth. He was seized with a severe nified (Lindley). epileptic fit: his limbs assumed a tetanic stiffness, and there was spasmodic breathing. He was quite uncon- scious, and speedily died. The only marked appearances were fluidity of tlie blood, and patches of redness on the mucous membrane of the stomach. (Wibmer, loc. cit.) Hemlock Water-Dropwort. (CEnanthe Crocata.) This umbelliferous plant grows on the banks of rivers, streams, and ditches. It is one of the most poisonous of the order, and is considered to be one of the most virulent of English vegetable poisons.


[414/1290 b21964944_0414.jp2]

350 SYMPTOMS OF POISONING BY (ENANTIIE CROCATA. Symptoms and Appearances.—A set of cases of poisoning by ojnanthe was communicated to the ' Medical Gazette' (vol. 34, p. 288), by Mr. Bossey, of Woolwich. A number of convicts, while engaged at work, ate the leaves and roots of the oenanthe. In about twenty minutes, one man, without any apparent warning, fell down in strong convulsions, which soon ceased, but left a wild expression on his countenance. Soon afterwards, as many as nine feU into a state of convulsions and insensibility. The face of the man first seized became bloated and livid, there was a bloody foam about the mouth and nostrils, the breathing was stertorous and convulsive, and there was great prostration of strength, with insensibility : he died in five minutes after the symptoms had set in. A second died under similar symptoms in a quarter of an hour, although the stomach-pump was used, and some leaves were extracted with the fluids. A third who had assisted in carrying the two former, Avas himself seized Avith convulsions, and died in about an hour ; and soon after him, a fourth died, in spite of the most energetic remedial treatment by cold aifusion, emetics, stimulants, stimulating frictions, as well as the use of the stomach-pump. Two other cases proved fatal, the one in nine days, and the other in eleven; and in these two cases there was irritation of the alimentary canal. On inspecting the bodies of those who died quickly, there was con- gestion of the cerebral vessels; and, in one instance, a layer of extravasated blood was found beneath the inner membrane (pia mater). In the first case, which proved most quickly fatal, the cerebral vessels were not congested. The pharynx and gullet had a white appeai-ance, and contained some mucus, with portions of the root. The lining membrane of the windpipe and air-tubes was intensely injected with dark blood. The lungs were gorged with fluid blood. The blood in the heart was very black and fluid. The stomach and intestines Avere externally of a pink colour : the cavity of the stomach Avas lined with a thick viscid mucus, containing portions of the root. The mucous membrane Avas much corrugated, and the follicles Avere particularly enlai'ged. Similar appearances Avere met Avith in all. In the two protracted cases, the mucous membrane of the stomach and bowels was softened and thickened. It had a pink, colour externally, but no red appearance internally. The vessels of the brain were congested. In the others Avho partook of the roots, the symptoms Avere not so severe. Under the free use of purgatives, a consider- able quantity of the root Avas discharged, and in a few days the men recovered. These cases show that the oenanthe is a poAverful poison. It destroys life Avith even greater rapidity than arsenic; for it here proved fatal to a strong healthy man in less than one hour. Chemists have not yet ascertained on Avhat prin- ciple its active properties depend, but they appear to reside chiefly in the root. In April 1857, two fatal cases occurred at West Boldon in Durham. Tavo labourers ate some of the roots of the oenanthe. They Avere found soon after- wards lying insensible and speechless, their faces livid, tongues sAvollen and protruded, and there were convulsive movements of their teeth, frothy mucus with blood about their mouths, eyes full and projecting, pupils dilated, breath- ing stertorous and laboured, Avith occasional genei-al convulsions. They both died in an hour and a half from th^time at which they Avere first discovered. On inspection, it Avas found that there had been bleeding from the ears; the abdomen was livid and swollen. The stomach contained a gruelly liquid Avitli some of the partly digested roots:' on removing this liquid, the membrane Avas found congested and softened. The lungs were engorged Avith dark liquid blood, and the blood contained in the heart was in a similar state. Mr. Boyle, to whom these cases occurred, forwarded to me a portion of the roots, and there was no doubt that they Avere the roots of the oenanthe crocata. It is not often that attempts are made to destroy others by the administra- tion of these vegetable poisons; but a case occurred in France, in Avhich


[415/1290 b21964944_0415.jp2]

351 (ENANTIIE CROCATA. FOOL'S PARSLEY. woman attempted to poi.son her husband by mixing slices of the root of this phint Avith his soup. His suspicions were excited by the acrid taste of the soup. The woman was tried lor the crime, and M. Touhnouche deposed at the trial, that the plant from which the root had been taken, Avas the oenantlie crocata—that it was a powerful poison, and might cause death in two or three hours. The prisoner was convicted, and condemned to ten years at the galleys. ('Gaz. Med.,' Jan. 3, 184G, 18 ; also, ' Journ. de Chim. Med.,' 1845, 533.) Analysis.—The oenanthe crocata can be identified only by its botanical cha- racters. The leaves are of a dark green colour, Avith a reddish coloured border. They have no unpleasant odour when rubbed. The plant bears a greater resemblance to celery than most of the other umbelliferie. Its stem is channelled, round, smooth and branched, of a yellowish red colour, and growing to the height of two or three feet. The root consists of a series of oblong tubercles with long slender fibres. It is of a yellowish-white colour, and not unpleasant to the taste. It is the most active part of the plant. The leaves yield much tannic acid to Avater, but the decoction appears to contain no alkaloidal base, since the chloriodide of potassium and mercury produces no precipitate in it. The roots and stems of this plant are more frequently eaten than the leaves. Nevertheless, it may be occasionally necessary to identify the plant by the leaves. The annexed engraving is taken from a photograph of the larger leaves of the oenanthe crocata, groAvn from the roots of the plant pro- ciu'ed from the spot Avhere the tAvo labourers above mentioned had procured their fatal meal. The smaller leaves of this plant are much Avider in propor- tion to their length. Part of Leaf of (Enanthe. Fool's Parsley, (^tJiusa Cynapium.) Fool's Parsley, or Lesser Hemlock is very common in gardens and hedge- roAvs. The leaves so closely resemble those of parsley that they have, often been gathered for them by mistake. Symptoms and Appearances.—That the root of this plant contains a most energetic poison, and that it is capable of producing rapidly fatal eflfects, is proved by a case reported by Mr. Thomas, in which death took place in an hour. In May 1845, a girl aged five years, in good health, ate the bulbs of the sethusa by mistake for young turnips. She was suddenly seized with


[416/1290 b21964944_0416.jp2]

352 fool's parsley, monkshood. pain in the abdomen, followed by sickness, but no vomiting. She complained of feeling very ill. On trying to eat, she could not swallow. She was iiica- pable of answering questions, and her countenance bore a wild expression. The lower jaw became fixed, so as to prevent anything being introduced into the mouth. She then became insensible, and died in an hour from the com- mencement of the symptoms : so far as could be ascertained, there were no convulsions. A second child, aged three years, shortly after eating the same substance, was attacked with pain in the stomach, sickness, vomiting, and profuse perspiration. She soon recovered, with the exception of suffering severe griping pains without purging, but these disappeared on the following day. A third child, of the same age, suffered from similar symptoms. Re- covery in the two last cases was due to the plant having been eaten on a full stomach, and to the effect of early and copious vomiting. (' Med. Times', Aug. 23, 1845, 408.) The following case"occurred to Mr. Stevenson: Two ladies partook of some salad, into which sethusa cynapium had been put by mistake for parsley. They soon experienced nausea, Avith occasional vomit- ing ; oppressive headache, giddiness, and a strong propensity to sleep, at the same time that this was prevented by frequent startings and excessive agita- tion. There was a sensation of pungent heat in the mouth, throat, and stomach, with difficulty of swallowing, thirst, and loss of appetite. There was numbness, with tremors of the limbs. The two patients only slowly re- covered from the effects of the poison. (Churchill's ' Botany.') Analysis.—It is known from garden parsley by the smell of its leaves when rubbed, which is peculiar, disagreeable, and very different fi'om that possessed by the leaves of parsley. The leaves of Fool's parsley are finer, more acute. Portion of a leaf of Fool's Parsley, natural size. Seeds of Fool's Parsley. a Natural size. 6 Magnified 30 diameters, c Group of Seeds. decun-ent, and of a darker green colour. They are represented in the air- nexed illustration, from a photograph of the living plant. Its flower-stem, "which is striated, or slightly grooved, is easily known from all other umbel- liferous plants by the beard, or three long pendulous leaves of the involucrum under the flower. The flowers are white, those of the garden parsley of a pale yellow colour. The poisonous properties of this plant are believed to be due to an alka- loid, the chemical characters of which are unknown. Monkshood, (Aconitum Napellus.) This well-known garden plant is in some parts of the countiy called Wolfs- bane^ and in Ireland Blue-rocket. The roots, seeds, and leaves are highly poisonous, owing to the presence of the alkaloid aconitina ; the root is es- pecially noxious, and Avhen the leaves have fallen off, it appears to possess its


[417/1290 b21964944_0417.jp2]

POISONING BY THE ROOT OF ACONITK. 353 greatest virulence. These parts of the plant, wlien masticated, produce a peculiarly cool numbing sensation, affecting the lips, tongue, and interior of the mouth generally. At first the root appears to be tasteless, as the effects are only manifested after twenty minutes or half an hour. From tasting only a small portion of the dried root, I found that this disagreeable sensation re- mained on the tongue and lips for four hours. In larger quantity the taste has been described as burning, and it is stated to have been followed by a hot acrid sensation in the throat. Si/mptoms and Appearances.—In from a few minutes to an hour after the poison has been taken, the patient complains of numbness and tingling in the mouth and throat, which are parched :—there is giddiness, with numbness and tingling in the limbs, a loss of power in the legs, sometimes frothing at the mouth and severe pain in the abdomen, followed by vomiting and purging. In some cases the patient is completely paralyzed but retains his conscious- ness : in others the giddiness is followed by dimne.ss of sight, delirium, and other cerebral symptoms, but not amounting to the complete coma produced by the cerebral or narcotic poisons. The pupils are dilated, the pulse sinks, the skin is cold and livid, and the breathing is difficult. Convulsions are not commonly observed in man, or they are indicated by general tremors or twitchings of the voluntary muscles. The poison produces convulsions in animals. Root.—Poisoning by the root of aconite is by no means unfrequent. In the spring or autumn, the root is liable to be mistaken for that of horseradish. It has been thus accidentally eaten on several occasions and has caused death. A mistake of this kind led to fatal results in three hours in a case which occurred at Lambeth ; and another set of cases occurred at Dingwall, in Scotland, in January 1856. Here three persons were poisoned by reason of their having had .sauce made with the root of aconite, served at dinner with roast beef in place of horseradish sauce ! They were healthy adults ; they all died within three hours and a half. Mistakes of this kind show deplor- able ignorance, but there is always the risk of their occurrence when horse- radish and aconite are grown near to each other in a garden, at that season of the year when the leaves have fallen. A trial for murder by poisoning with the root of this plant took place at the Monaghan Lent Assizes in 1841 (Rer/. v. McConkey), in which Dr. Geoghegan, of Dublin, conducted the medico-legal investigation. The medical evidence Avas beset with difficulties; for no trace of the poison could be dis- covered in the body, and it was only by a close analysis of symptoms and appearances, that the charge was brought home to the prisoner. The de- ceased had eaten for his dinner some greens dressed for him by the prisoner ; he complained of their having a sharp taste, and this was perceived also by another person present who tasted them. It was ascertained that the de- ceased, soon after the meal, had vomited a greenish matter, and suffered from purging, restlessness, incoherence, lock-jaw, and clenching of the hands. He died in about three hours after having eaten the greens, but was not seen by a medical man while living. The chief appearance met with was in the stomach, where the mucous membrane was of a light reddish-brown colour. Traces of vegetable matter were found in the intestines : but no poison could be detected either botanically or chemically. The symptoms suffered by a friend of the deceased, who had accidentally tasted the greens, were very characteristic of poisoning by aconite. In t^vo minutes he felt a burning heat in the mouth, throat, gullet, and stomach ; then a sensation of swelling in the face, with a general feeling of numbness and creeping of the skin, liestlessness, dimness of sight, and stupor almo.st amounting to insensibility, followed; and in about an hour after the meal, he was found speechless,— A A


[418/1290 b21964944_0418.jp2]

354 SYMPTOMS AND APPEARANCES. frothing at the nose and mouth, the hands and jaws clenched, appearing occasionally as if dead, and then again reviving. Vomiting, purging, tender- ness at the pit of the stomach, cramps, tingling of the flesh, and a burning taste in the mouth followed. This man did not entirely recover until after the lapse of five weeks. The prisoner Avas convicted of murder, and con- fessed before her execution that the powdered root of aconite had been mixed with pepper and sprinkled over the greens. ('Dublin Med. Journal,' vol. 19, p. 403.) . . It is stated that one drachm of the dried root has proved fatal: but it is probable that less than this Avould cause death. In November 1856, Mr. Hadfield forwarded to me four small slices of aconite root, taken from the stomach of a man who had died in three hours. The quantity which he had swallowed with suicidal intention was unknown: but none was thrown olF by vomiting so far as could be ascertained. The symptoms within half an hour of death were burning pain in the stomach, parched mouth,—intense thirst,—retching and vomiting of a tenacious mucus, cold perspiring skin,— imperceptible pulse and a feeling of deadly sickness. The patient was con- scious : there were no convulsions. On inspection.! there Avas congestion of' the brain as well as of its membranes ; the heart was flaccid, and there was some blood on the right side. The stomach contained much half-digested food, with four slices of aconite root apparently unaltered. The mucous membrane presented a slight reddish-brown patch at the greater end of the size of half a crown. It was otherwise healthy as Avell as the other organs. (For an account of the effects of this plant I must refer the reader to a paper by Dr. Geoghegan, ' Dub. Jour. Med. Sci.' vol. 19, p. 403.) The tincture of the root operates powerfully in small doses. The late Dr. Male of Birmingham died from the effects of not more than eighty drops taken in ten doses, over a period' of four days,—the largest quantity taken at once being teii drops. ('Prov. Med. and Surg. Journ.' August 20, 1845,, p. 535 ; also ' Med. Gaz.' vol. 36, p. 861.) The late Dr. Pereira informed me that he had known tingling and general numbness of the limbs produced in i hysterical females by a dose of only Jive minims of a carefully prepared '. tinctm-e. Dr. Topham has published an account of the symptoms produced > by fifteen minims of the tincture of the root of aconite. Immediately after r taking the poison in a mixture into which it was put by mistake, the patient: (a woman, get. 27) felt a sensation of numbness in the tongue, with dilHculty. of swallowing. There were convulsive twitchings of the muscles of the face,. and she lost the power of walking. There was complete unconsciousness,-. Avhich continued for two hours, when she began to recover. The pupils Avere.' observed to be slightly contracted. The intensity of the symptoms varied at; intervals, and came on in paroxysms. They indicated great disorder of the. nervous system. The next day she had numbness in both arms, but she rapidly and perfectly recovered. ('Lancet,' July 19, 1851, p. 56. See als» the account of a case of recovery in ' Amer. Journal of Medical Sciences,', January 1862, p. 285.) _ In January 1853, a woman took by mistake seventy minims of Fleming's tinctw-e of the root mixed with one grain of acetate of morphia. In a few minutes she became very thirsty, complained of a burning sensation and painr in her stomach, to relieve which she swallowed a quantity of cold water. Ini fifteen minutes there was violent vomiting, which continued for two hours.^ She lost the power of standing, and was very restless. The pain in thft stx)mach increased, and there were convulsive movements of the muscles^ She was conscious until shortly before her death, Avhich took place in abouti four hours after she had taken the poison. There were no general convul-1 sions : the pam m the stomach was well marked throughout. On inspection.


[419/1290 b21964944_0419.jp2]

ON POISONING BY TINCTURE OF ACONITE. 355 the membranes of the brain were found congested, but the brain itself was firm and healthy. The lungs were healthy : and the heart was flaccid, the uterus congested. The stomach contained some mucus, and the membrane at the larger curvature was injected (reddened) in patches, but otherwise natural. The mucous membrane of the duodenum was in a high state of inflammation, abraded in patches, softened, and broken down. Some spots were of a very dark colour, passing into mortification. In October 1852 an excise officer lost his life by merely tasting Fleming's tincture of aconite, under the supposition that it was flavoured spirit. He was able to walk from the Custom House over London Bridge, but he died in about fom- hours after taking the poison. The case of the man Hunt who, in November 1863, destroyed his wife and children by prussic acid, presents some features of interest in reference to the symptoms and appearances produced by tincture of aconite. The quantity of tincture taken by him was not determined; but the man was soon afterwards seized with violent spasmodic retching, face pale, skin cold and clammy, pulse small and hardly perceptible, and the action of the heart feeble. The pupils were much dilated, and the eyes brilliant and sparkling; the breathing quiet and regular, except during the fits. He complained of pain in his heart. In attempting to walk, he staggered, and had no power to raise his arms. He was perfectly conscious,—called for writing materials, and wrote a few lines. He then became suddenly worse, and a quarter of an hour before his death he lost all power and sensation in his limbs, the sharpest pinches producing no impression. The pulse was imperceptible. There were no convulsions, but complete relaxation of the limbs at death, which appeared to arise fi-om syncope three quarters of an hour after he had taken the poison. On inspec- tion forty-two hours after death, there was great rigidity of the muscles. The substance of the brain was firm and healthy : the vessels on the surface were filled with blood. The heart was healthy : the right side was greatly dis- tended with dark fluid blood; the left side contracted and quite empty. The lungs were healthy. In the abdomen the viscera were healthy, with the ex- ception of the stomach and duodenum. Mr. Puckle, to whom I am indebted for the above particulars, brought the stomach to Guy's Hospital, and we ex- amined it together. There was great capillary congestion at the larger end of the stomach, the mucovis membrane having a bright red colour. There were marks of irritation, with softening and separation of the mucous lining, the •whole of the membrane being in a highly corrugated condition. Traces of aconitina were found in the contents of the stomach. The deceased had pro- vided himself with an ounce of the tincture of aconite, and had swallowed the greater part of this mixed with water. The tincture varies much in strength. In the 'Lancet,' vol. 2,18G1, p. 170, it is stated that a lady recovered who had swallowed two teaspoonfuls by mistake for laudanum. She had been in the habit of taking large doses of laudanum. After she had swallowed the aconite she could not rise from her seat, and ex- claimed that she had lost the use of her legs. She complained of a burning sensation in the throat and constriction at the chest. Her mind was clear, and she had the consciousness of no feeling in her arms and legs. The symp- toms subsided in two hours, and she recovered in eight hours. Vomiting had been early promoted by emetics. In November 1862, a case was communicated to me by Dr. Vachell, of Cardiff; in which a man died irom the effects of two grains of the extract of aconite taken in two pills. As in other cases in which active poisons have been administered in pills, the symptoms were a long time in appearing, but when they once commenced, they proceeded rapidly to a fatal termination. A well-marked case of poisoning by a decoction of this plant occurred to A A 2


[420/1290 b21964944_0420.jp2]

ROOT, LEAVES, AND SEEDS OF ACONITE. 356 Mr. Sayle. A man, ret. 39, boiled the fresh stalks and leaves of aconite in half a pint of beer until it Avas reduced to a quarter of a pint: he then swal- lowed half of it as a medicine. An hour afterwards he was found in bed, rolling his arms about and foaming at the mouth :—the pupils were widely dilated, the legs were paralyzed, the skin was cold and clammy, there was great nausea, the pulse was scarcely perceptible, and he was perfectly in- sensible. He soon afterwards died. The abdomen was examined, and the only appearance met with was a slight redness near the cardiac extremity of the stomach. (' Med. Times,' Oct. 18, 1845, p. 70.) Analysis. The botanical characters of tlie leaves and root, when any por- tions can be obtained, will enable a medical witness to identify this vegetable poison. The root has been 1 frequently and fatally mis- taken for horseradish, but there are these striking differences : — 1. Aconite • root is very short, conical, and tapei-s rapidly to a point. 2. It is externally of an earthy-brown colour,. —internally white and of an earthy smell,—the cut surface is rapidly reddened by exposure to air. It has ^ numerous long thin fibres proceeding fi-om it. 3. It has at first a bitter taste, but after a quarter of an • hour or twenty minutes • it produces a disagreeable sense of tingling and numb- - ness on the lips and tongue. 1. Horseradish root is long,. cylindrical or nearly so,. and of the same thickness- for many inches. 2. It is- externally whitisli-yellow, and has a pungent odourr Avhen scraped. 3. Its tastee is sometimes bitter, but it t produces an immediate hotit or pungent sensation. The leaves of aconite or monkshood are of a dark-green colour and of an peculiar shape. The illustration at p. 357 is engraved from a photograph of a fresh leaf When masticated they slowly produce on the lips and tonguei the persistent sense of tingling and numbness, with the sense of coolness, ob- served in the root. They are less powerful than the root and seeds. The< seeds differ in appearance irom those of other poisonous plants. (See p. 357.) AcoNiTiNA.—The alkaloidal base of this plant, Aconitina, is a formidable poison, exceeding all others in its effects. In one case one-fiftieth part of a gram nearly proved fatal to an elderly lady (Pereira, ' Mat. Med.,' vol. 2, pt. 2, p. 695) ; and it is probable that one-tenth part of a grain of pure aconitina would prove fetal to a human being. Some samples of this alkaloid arc however, much less potent than others, and the chemical properties are also- different. (See paper by Schroff, ' Reil's Journal fiir Toxikolo-ie,' 3rd H.l a. Root of Aconite. b. Root of Horseradish.


[421/1290 b21964944_0421.jp2]

PROPERTIES OF ACONITINA. 357 1857, p. 335), and one by Liegeois (* Chem. News,' Oct. 24, 18G3, p. 201). This contains the account of a simple method for its extraction. Small Leaf of Aconite, natural size, from a photograph. Analysis.—A sample of English aconitina possessed the following proper- ties:— It was in whitish granular masses, without any distinctly crystalline structure. 1. When heated it readily fused and burnt in tlie air with a bright yellow flame. 2. Heated in a close tube, it evolved first an alkaline and then an acid vapour. 3. It was scarcely soluble in water, but was dissolved by weak acids and alcohol: it did not readily crystallize. 4. Nitric acid dis- solved it without causing any change of colour. 5. Sulphui-ic acid gave to it a yellowish colour, and green oxide of chromium was separated on adding to it a crystal of bichromate of potash. Aconitina cannot be separated from its solutions in a crystalline state by the addition of ammonia. 6. Tannic acid and the chloriodide of potassium and mercury readily precipitate the alkaloid. Aconitina is sufficiently soluble in ether to allow of its separation from organic liquids by the process of Stas (see page 339). Dr. Headland recom- mends as a physiological test the production of an alcoholic extract of the contents of the stomach and its application to animals. One-twentieth of a grain will be sufficient: the l-300th of a grain will poison a mouse; the 1-lOOth, a bird; and 1-lOOOth causes tingling and numbness of the tip of the tongue. The 1-100th of a grain dissolved in spirit and rubbed into the skin, causes loss of feeling, lasting tor some time. ('Lancet,' March 29, 1856, p. 343.) There is a great difference in the properties of this alkaloid accord- ing to the mode in which it is prepared (Bouchardat, 'Ann. de Therapeutique,' 1864, pp. 48 and 54; also, ' Annuaire,' 1863, p. 41.) CHAPTER 30. ATROPA BELLADONNA OR DEADLY NIGHTSHADE —POISONING BY ATROPTA—LOBELIA —FOXGLOVE. DIGITALINE—DATURA STRAMONIUM, OR THORNAPPLE—DATURA ALBA AND FASTUOSA. DATURIA—LABURNUM—TAXUS BACCATA OR YEW. Deadly Nightshade (Atropa Belladonna). Symptoms.—Ihe symptoms which are produced by the leaves, berries, and root of belladonna are of a uniform character, and, as a summary, they may be thus described:—Heat and dryness of the mouth and throat, nausea, vomiting, giddiness, indistinct or double vision, delirium, great excitement,


[422/1290 b21964944_0422.jp2]

358 BELLADONNA. EFFECTS OF THE BERRIES AND ROOT. convulsions, followed by stupor, and lethargy. The pupils are much dilated, and the eyes are insensible to light. In two cases which occurred to Mr. Tufnell, the pupils were contracted during sleep, althoiigh dilated in _ the waking state. ('Dublin Med. Press,' Jan. 5, 1853. 'Journal de Chimie Mediciile,' 1853, p. 695.) Several deaths from the poisonous effects of the berries, occurred in London in 1846. The following case was admitted into Guy's Hospital:—A boy, ajt. 14, ate, soon after breakfast, about thirty of the berries of the belladonna, which he had bought as fruit in the streets. In about three hours, he had the sensation of his face being swollen : his throat became hot and dry, his vision was impaired, objects appeared double, and they seemed to revolve and run backwards. His hands and face were flushed, and his eyelids swollen : there were occasional flashes of light before his eyes. He tried to eat, but could not swallow on accoimt of the state of his throat. In endeavouring to walk home he stumbled and staggered; and he felt giddy Avhenever he attempted to raise his head. His parents thought him intoxicated: he was incoherent,—frequently counted his money, and did not know the i silver from the copper coin. His eyes had a fixed, brilliant, and dazzling: gaze ; he could neither hear nor speak plainly, and there was great thirst; he caught at imaginary objects in the air, and seemed to have lost all know- ledge of distance. His fingers were in constant motion : there was headache,. but neither vomiting nor purging. He did not reach the hospital until nine ^ hours had elapsed; and the symptoms were then much the same as those' above described. He attempted to get out of bed with a reeling, drunken i motion; his speech was thick and indistinct. The pupils were so strongly f dilated that there was merely a ring of iris, and the eyes Avere quite insensible ? to light. The eyelids did not close Avhen the hand Avas passed suddenly r before them. He had evidently lost the power of vision; although he stared! fixedly at objects as if he saw them. The nerves of common sensation weree unaffected. When placed on his legs he could not stand. His pulse was 90,, feeble and compressible: his mouth was in constant motion, as if he weree eating something. His bladder was full of urine on admission. He con- tinued in this state for two days, being occasionally conscious, when by a» free evacuation of the bowels, some small seeds were passed: these Averee examined and identified as the seeds of belladonna. The boy gi-aduallyf recovered, and left the hospital on the sixth day after his admission:—thee progress of recovery was indicated by the state of the pupils, Avhich had then a only acquired their natural size and power of contraction. In three other ■ cases which occurred at the same time, the berries having been baked in a pie, pains in the limbs, drowsiness, insensibility, and convvilsions, were among the symptoms. In two instances of poisoning by the berries related by Dr. Moll, the symptoms bore a strong resemblance to those of delirium tremens, but among them were heat and dryness of the throat, loss of power of swallowing, incoherent speech, double vision, and strange spectral illusions, with occasional fits of wild and ungovernable laughter. On the following morning both these patients recovered as if from a dream; but they suffered i for some time from languor, thirst and dryness of the throat: the pupils also« continued dilated. (Casper's ' Wochenschrift,' 10 Jan. 1846, p. 26.) Two cases, showing the poisonous effects of the berries on children, are quoted in the ' Edinburgh Medical and Surgical Journal.' (Vol. 29. p. 452.) The root of the belladonna, administered in the form of decoction as a clyster, has destroyed life. Four scruples of the root were employed, and the liquid, strained and reduced by evaporation to four ounces, Avas injected. After a slight stage of excitement, the patient, a female, set. 27, fell into a state of complete coma; the countenance appeared swollen, and of a reddish- brown colour; the pupils were excessively dilated; the pulse was at firstf«U


[423/1290 b21964944_0423.jp2]

rOISONOUS EFFECTS OF THE LEAVES AND SEEDS. 359 and hard, then small; death took place in five hours. (Casper's * Wochens ' 8 Feb. 1845, p. 101.) The leaves of belladonna have occasionally given rise to accidents. A young man swallowed an infusion of two drachms of the leaves. In about an hour he found great difficulty in swallowing, the salivary secretion was suppressed, and objects appeared to be in perpetual motion before him. He became delirious, attempted repeatedly to pass his urine but could not: and for an hour and a half he was in constant motion, although his gait was unsteady. The mviscles of his face, jaws, and limbs were agitated by con- vulsive twitchings: the pupils were excessively dilated, and there were singular hallucinations. There was neither nausea, vomiting, nor purging. Emetics, injections, and bleeding were resorted to, and the next morning the patient awoke as if from a dream. (' Ann. d'Hyg.' Oct. 1847, p. 413.) Leaves of belladonna have been ignorantly supplied for ash-leaves, and half a wine-glassful of the decoction of the leaves produced on Dr. Garrod the usual symptoms of poisoning by this plant. His patient, who took half a pint, suffered severely. The chief symptoms were giddiness, difficulty in walking, dryness of the mouth and throat, and perversion of taste, indistinctness of vision, dilatation of the pupils, bloodshot eyes, difficult articulation, delirium, insensibility, and a scarlet redness of the skin of the face and neck, followed by a peeling off of the cuticle. The leaves of belladonna are peculiar in shape. The annexed illustration is from a photograph of a small leaf of the fresh plant. According to Mr. Luxton, 1,000 grains of leaves yield only five grains of atropia. (See ' Pharm. Journal,' 1855, p. 300.) The seeds of belladonna are small, of a somewhat oval a dark colour. Under a low magnifying power they have honeycombed surface. In henbane the surface of the seeds presents more irregular depressions, resembling those seen on certain corals or madrepores. (See p. 329.) Two persons swallowed a small spoonful of the ex- tract of belladonna by mistake for that of juniper. There was speedily indistinctness of vision, tottering gait, delirium, incoherency, hallucinations, and dilata- tion of the pupils. In one there was great cerebral excitement. The apothecary to whom the extract was taken tasted it, and soon experienced symptoms which led to a suspicion of its real nature. Under treatment, the symptoms of poisoning disappeai-ed in two days; but one of the patients died on the seventh day from disease. The physical and physiological properties of the extract indicated that it was belladonna; but the attempt to procure atropia fi:om it entirely failed. A portion of the concentrated extract given to a dog, caused dilatation of the pupil in a quarter of an hour,—an index of the rapidity with which the alkaloid atropia is absorbed into the blood. Appearances.—Tlhe appearances observed in several cases of poisoning by the berries which proved flital in London during the autumn of 1846, were as follows: the vessels of the brain were congested with liquid blood; the stomach and intestines were pale and flaccid; there were some red spots towards the cardiac end. In other fatal cases, of which the appearances have Small Leaf of Belladonna, natural size. hape, and of a somewhat Seeds of Belladonna. a. Natural size. b. Magnified 30 diameters.


[424/1290 b21964944_0424.jp2]

3G0 CHEMICAL PROPERTIES OF ATROPIA. "been reported, the vessels of the brain and its membranes were found dis- tended with tliick black blood. Red spots have also been observed around the throat and gullet, and congested patches of a dark purple colour on the coats of the stomach. In some instances the mucous membrane has been com- pletely dyed by the juice of the berries. A boy, £Et. 5, after having eaten a quantity of the berries of the belladonna, went to bed, was very restless, vomited once, and died in convulsions about fifteen hours after having taken the poison. On inspection, the eyes were half-open, with an intense lustre; the pupils dilated ; the mouth was spasmodically closed and the sphincter ani relaxed. The cerebral vessels were distended with dark-coloured blood : the substance of the brain, cerebellum, and medulla oblongata, presented numerous bloody points. In the throat and gullet there were several patches of redness. In the stomach there was some fluid, with three open berries; the mucous membrane was of a reddish-blue colour in various parts. (Case by Dr. Rosenberger, Canstatt's ' Jahresb.' 1844, v. 295.) Analysis.—The indigestible nature of the leaves, fruit, and seeds Avill com- monly iead to their detection in the matters vomited or passed by the bowels, or in*the contents of the viscera after death. The seeds of belladonna are very small,—they can, however, be distinguished by the microscope from the seeds of other poisonous plants. The colouring matter of the berry is of a deep purple hue : it is turned green by alkalies, and red by acids. The leaves Avould be known by their botanical characters, and a decoction or infusion of them by the liquid causing dilatation of the pupil. Dr. Runge states that the urine, blood, or organic liquids containing this poison, applied to the eye of an animal, cause dilatation of the pupil. Orfila did not observe this effect in poisoning by belladonna (op. cit. ii. 267), and even if it occurred, he con- sidered that it would be too vague a sign for diagnosis, as it may take place equally with henbane and stramonium. Atropia.—Atropia is the name given to the alkaloidal principle of bella- donna. This alkaloid is a powerful poison. In November 1850, Mr. Sells, of Guildford, forwarded to me for examination the stomach of a young man Avho had poisoned himself by taking two grains of atropia. He took the dose on going to bed. He was heard to snore heavily during the night, and was found dead about seven o'clock in the morning, lying on his right side, the surface livid, the limbs rigid and contracted, and with a little broAvn matter issuing from the mouth. The pupils were much dilated. The mucous mem- brane of the stomacli presented a diffused redness, which might have arisen from some biandy which he had swallowed. No trace of the poison could be detected in the stomach or its contents. In the 'Association Medical Journal' (Sept. IG, 1853, p. 818) will be found the report of a case in Avhich all the symptoms of poisoning by belladonna arose from the appli- cation of a weak solution of atropia and water to the conjunctiva. One-eighth of a grain in- jected into the skin for the relief of sciatica, pro- duced all the symptoms of poisoning. ('Pharm. Journal,' May 1862, p. 583.) ' ^/ia/_ys«s.—Atropia is a white ciystalline sub- stance, not very soluble in water, but easily dis- solved by alcohol, ether, and diluted acids. It does not readily crystallize, but it forms crystal- imperfect crystals of sulphate of lizable salts. The annexed illustration shoAVs Atropia magnified 80 diameters. the irregular Crystalline form of the sulphate of atropia, as it is deposited from an alcoholic solution. Ammonia added to the solution of sulphate of atropia does not separate the alkaloid in distinct crystals.


[425/1290 b21964944_0425.jp2]

rOISONING BY LOBELIA. 361 In this respect it differs from morphia and strychnia. When atropia is heated on platinum it melts, darkens in colour, and burns Avith a yellowish smoky flame. Sulphuric, hydrochloric, and nitric acids dissolve it Avithout any change of colour. Water added to the mixture of sulphuric acid j^roduces no change : but a crystal of bichromate of potash produces a green colour from the formation of oxide of chromium. Tannic acid precipitates the alkaloid from its solutions: but the most eftectual precipitant is the chloi-iodide of potassium and mercury, which throAvs doAvn a dense white precipitate even in very diluted solutions. Atropia is also precipitated by chloride of gold, but like strychnia, it is not precipitated by sulphocyanide of potassium or chro- mate of potash. It may be detected in, and sejiarated from, organic liquids by the process of Stas. (See page 329.) A small quantity of a diluted solution of atropia applied to the eye pro- duces dilatation of the pupil. This may be employed as a physiological test for the presence of atropia in an extract from the contents of the stomach, or of any organic liquid. The introduction of a portion into the cellular membrane of an animal, besides producing the ordinary symptoms of poison- ing, causes dilatation of the pupil. Indian Tobacco. (Lobelia Inflata.) The powdered leaves of Indian tobacco contain an acrid principle which is capable of producing poisonous effects on the brain and spinal marrow, attended Avith irritation of the stomach and bowels. When administered in doses of from ten to twenty gi-ains, lobelia operates as an emetic ; but in larger quantity it acts deleteriously. It Avould also appear that even ordinary medicinal doses affect some individuals Avith great severity. There is an erroneous notion that this is a useful medicine and not a poison, although like arsenic and opium it may be either, according to the mode in which it is employed. In one case a man lost his life by sAvalloAving one drachm of the poAvdered leaves, prescribed by a quack. This person Avas seen by a medical practi- tioner soon after he had taken the poison : he Avas evidently suffering great pain, but he Avas quite unconscious,—the pulse Avas small, and the pupils Avere strongly contracted and insensible to light. He had vomited the greater part of the poison. He suffered from spasmodic twitchings of the face, sank into a state of complete insensibility, and died in about thirty-six hours. On inspection, some fluid Avas found in the stomach, but none of the ])OAvdcr. The mucous membrane Avas intensely inflamed, and the vessels of the brain were strongly congested. ('Pharm. Times,' May 1, 1847, p. 182.) The seeds of lobelia are equally poisonous. In the 'Med. Times and Gazette,' Nov. 26, 1853, p. 5C8, two cases are reported in Avhich the seeds proved fatal. In one, the mucous membrane ol" the stomach Avas highly inflamed. Another case is referred to in the same journal, March 12, 1853, p, 270. There have been many inquests and trials fbr manslaughter in this country as the result of the improper administration of the leaves of the Lobelia injlata by ignorant quacks, calling themselves medical botanists and dealers in vegetable medicines. The medical evidence given on these trials has proved that in large doses lobelia is a most noxious drug. (See ' Medical Gazette,' vol. 44, pp. 383 and 433; vol. 4G, p. 384 ; ' Lancet,' March 5, 1853, p. 237; 'Pharm. Journ.' Aug. 1851, p. 87; and for some remarks on the action of the poison see a paper by JMr. Curtis and Dr. Pearson, 'Med. Gaz.' 1850, voh 46, p. 285; also Pereira, 'Mat. Med.' vol. 2, pt. 2, p. 12.) The impostors Avho profit by the prescription and sale of this drug among the ignorant poor, maintain the doctrine that it cannot kill, and never has been knoAvn to destroy life! In July 1856, one of these quacks Avas con-


[426/1290 b21964944_0426.jp2]

362 POISONING BY FOXGLOVE. victed on a charge of manslaughter for killing a woman with overdoses of lobelia. Severe pain, followed by loss of consciousness, and congestion of the brain, were the chief symptoms preceding death in this case. _ The ad- mission that, in proper doses, it was a useful remedy in spasmodic asthma was of no avail on this occasion. The man was sentenced to three months' imprisonment. {Reg. v. Boydeii or Jackson, Lincoln Summer Assizes, 1856.) A man named Riley Drake was convicted in the United States of havmg caused the death of a woman by administering lobelia in improper doses. (Wharton and Stille's 'Med. Jur.' p. 522.) Analysis. Lobelia is seen in the form of a greenish-coloured powder (frao-ments of leaves). This powder acquires a reddish-brown colour from ■ stroiv nitric acid, and is blackened by concentrated sulphuric acid. Iodine water'has no effect upon the infusion. The pro to- and per-sulphate of iron produce with it a dark-green colour, the persul- phate very rapidly. The leaves and seeds con- tain a resinoid substance called Lobelin, which has the smell and taste of the plant. It acts as a powerful emetic in doses of from one half to one grain. The leaves of lobelia are generally seen in fragments which do not readily admit of identi- a fication by the microscope. The seeds are very • - „ - * „ small, of a lengthened oval shape, reticulated on the surface with projecting hairs or fibres, and of a light brown colour. The discovei-y of them a. NaTurai'siL"'''^'''*' among the fragments of leaves would furnish a b. Magnified 70 diameters. sufficient proof of the presence of lobelia. Foxglove. (Digitalis Purpurea.) Purple foxglove is a well-known hedge-plant growing abundantly in the .southern districts of England. All parts of the plant—the seeds, leaves, and root—are poisonous, owing to the presence of the poisonous principle, digitaline. The leaves, whether in the form of powder, infusion, extract, or tincture, exert an action on the brain and spinal marrow, as well as on the stomach and bowels. They retain their noxious properties when dried. Symptoms and Effects.—Cases of poisoning by foxglove are not very nume- rous. One was the subject of a criminal trial at the Old Bailey in Oct. 182G. A quack Avas indicted for the manslaughter of a boy under the following cir- cumstances :—He prescribed for a trivial complaint six ounces of a strong decoction of the leaves. The boy was soon attacked with vomiting, piirging, and severe pain in the abdomen. After some time, he became lethargic, and slept for several hours; in the night he was seized with convulsions. The pupils were dilated and insensible, the pulse was slow, small, and irregular; coma followed, and the boy died twenty-two hours after taking the poison. On inspection, the membranes of the brain were found much injected, and the mucous lining of the stomach was partially inflamed. The prisoner was ac- quitted of the charge, because he had only given his fatal advice on the appli- cation of the friends of the deceased! ('Ed. Med. and Surg. Jour.,' 27, 223.) A young man swallowed a strong decoction of foxglove by mistake for puro-a- tive medicine. He was soon seized with vomiting, pain in the abdomen and purging. In the afternoon he fell asleep. At midnight he awoke, was attacked with violent vomiting, colic, convulsions, dilated and insensible pupils; his pulse was slow and irregular. He died twenty-two hours after taking the poison. (Wibmer, op. cit. Digitalis.) A few grains of the powdered leaves have been known to produce giddiness, languor, dimness of sight, and other nervous symptoms. A drachm has, however, been taken without causinc'


[427/1290 b21964944_0427.jp2]

MICROSCOPICAL CHARACTERS. DIGITALINE. 363 death ; but in this instance, it produced the most violent vomiting. As indi- cative of the singular elFect of this poison on the nerves of sensation, it may- be stated that ■ a coal-fire appeared to the patient to have a blue colour. A common efiect of this poison is to produce great depression of the heart's action. Analysis.—When foxglove has been taken in substance, {. e. in the form of seeds or leaves, or any portion of these has been swallowed in a decoction or infusion, fragments may be found in the stomach and bowels. In reference to the infusion, decoction, tincture, or extract, except there be sufficient to allow of the separation of digitaJine, there is no chemical process known by which the poison may be recognized. If any fragments of leaves or seeds are found in the contents of the stomach or in food, they may be identified by the aid of the microscope. The annexed illustration, taken from the living plant by photography, represents a small leaf and a portion of a larger leaf of this plant. ^HH^^HHBI^^HIIHHBH^^^HHB^^^H^^HHBHB O. Magnitled so diameters. Leaves of Foxglove. It is calculated that digitaline constitutes only one per cent, of the dried leaves. In reference to the seeds of foxglove, they are of a reddish-brown colour, remarkably small, oblong, and somewhat angular in shape. They have peculiar markings. By the aid of the microscope, they may be easily- distinguished from the seeds of hyoscyamus, datura, belladonna, and most other poisonous plants. Digitaline.—Digitaline is the active principle of foxglove: its physiological properties have been fully investigated by M. PlomoUe (' Journal de Pharmacie,' Janvier, 1845-57; also, Bouchardat, 'Ann. de Therapeutique,' 18G4, p. 155). The samples which I have examined have had a pale fawn colour, and no crys- talline character. I have found it impossible to crystallize it either by the use of alcohol, ether, or chloroform. Alcohol is its best solvent. Boiling water takes it up in small quantity, acquiring a tea-like odour: its solutions are intensely- bitter. It is a neutral vegetable principle, having neither alkaline nor acid reaction. In solution it is precipitated by tannic acid, but not by the chlorio- dide of potassium and mercury ; and by this property it may be distinguished from the true vegetable alkaloids. It forms no salts with acids. When heated in a tube, it melts and is decomposed: it evolves an acid, and not an ammoniacal vapour. Strong nitric acid dissolves it, and gives to it a deep orange-red colour unlike that of morphia or brucia. This acid solution speedily acquires a pale yellow on standing. Iodic acid is unchanged by it. Hydrochloric acid dissolves


[428/1290 b21964944_0428.jp2]

3G4 rOISOXIXG BY DIGITALINE. it, and when gently heated the solution becomes green. Strong sulphuric acid gives to it a brown colour, and after exposure for some time or by a gentle heat this colour changes to a purple black. If the sulphuric acid solution is diluted, the liquid immediately assumes a dingy gi-een colour. Diluted sulphuric acid heated with the powder gives a reddish-black colour. M. Grandeau has suggested an addition to this test. If the digitaline has been previously dissolved and the liquid evaporated, sulphuric acid imparts a rose colour to small quantities, and a reddish-brown or even brown colour when the digitaline is in rather large quantity. If the digitaline, moistened with sul- phuric acid, is exposed to the vapour of bromine, it immediately assumes a violet colour. This peculiar colour is observed even with the faintest trace of the principle, and regarded by him as characteristic. Seventeen of the alkaloids and principles thus tested did not acquire a violet colour, (' Chemical News,' July IG, 18G4, p, 26.) Accoi-ding to M. Grandeau, digitaline readily admits of separation by dialysis from organic liquids. MM. Tardieu and Koussin have not found this method so successful in practice as these experiments on pure digitaline would appear to indicate. (' Ann. d'Hygiene,' 18C4, p. 80.) M. HomoUe extracted from foxglove, by means of alcohol, three substances : an acrid matter soluble in ether, which produced on himself violent vomiting and fearful head-symptoms leading almost to the destruction of life; a highly concentrated bitter principle; and digitaline. The latter alone was proved upon hospital patients to have the power of decreasing the action of the heart, lower- ing the pulse, and increasing the quantity of urine. (' Pharmaceutical Journal,' Oct. 1861, p. 245.) Pure digitaline itself operates powerfully on man and animals in very small doses, and it must be regarded as a deadly poison. The 1-16th of a grain, which is considered to be equal to eight grains of the well-prepared powder of the dried leaves, is sufficient to cause symptoms of poisoning. Doses of from 1-11th to l-32nd part of a grain have lowered the pulse and caused nausea, vomiting, griping, piirging, and an increased secretion of urine. (Pereira, ' Mat. Med.,' vol. 2, p. 528.) Doses of from one-quarter to one-half of a grain would probably prove fatal to life. M. Homolle found in experiments on himself that .small doses of digitaline taken at intervals lowered the pulse to about one-fourth or one-fifth of the normal standard : thus in himself it fell 17 in one minute, which represents a fourth of the normal pulsations. In doses of fi-om l-15th to l-30th of a grain in twenty-four hours, digitaline slackened the circulation. In doses above l-15th of a grain, it produced on adults emetic and purgative effects, sometimes suddenly, at others slowly and gi-adually. In doses of from one to two grains, unless speedily thrown off by vomiting, it killed dogs in a few hours. (Orfila, * Toxicologic,' vol. 2, p. 350.) Digitaline has acquired some notoriety by reason of the trial of Dr. De la ■Pommemis, at Paris, in May 1864, for the murder of a woman named Pauw. This woman, who Avas about forty years of age, and in the enjoyment of good health, was suddenly seized with violent vomiting, and, after an illness of about twenty-four hours, died on the 17th November, 1863. The prisoner had just renewed his intimacy with her at the time of the occurrence of this fatal illness; and, after along interval of absence, he had induced her to insure her life in various insurance offices for an enormous sum of money, quite dispropor- tioned to her circumstances. Immediately after her death he put in a claim for these large insurances. The body of the deceased was exhumed and inspected for the first time on the 30th of November, thirteen days after death. The viscera throughout were healthy; they presented no unusual appearance, and revealed no natural cause of sudden death. The stomach and bowels, which Avere well preserved, bore no marks of the action of poison ; and, on a chemical analysis,


[429/1290 b21964944_0429.jp2]

THE CASE OF DE LA POMMERAIS. 3G5 Tio poison of any kind could be detected in these organs by MM. Tardien and Eoiissin. The symptoms, during the iUness, owing to there being no suspicion of poisoning, were not accurately observed. Repeated vomiting, with great depression and exhaustion, seem to have been the most prominent. Failing to detect any poison by chemistry and the microscope, the experts adopted the physiological test of administering prepared alcoholic and aqueous extracts of the stomach and intestines to animals. An attempt made to separate the active principle and remove the organic matter by dialysis, did not yield satisfactory results. ('Annales d'Hygiene,' 1864, 2,105.) Seventy-five grains of the mixed extracts above mentioned were introduced into the cellular membrane of the thigh of a dog. The animal vomited twice ; and in foiu- liours the pulsations of the heart sank from 102 to 8G : its action was irregular and intermittent, and the respiration was deep and painful. There were no narcotic symptoms : on the next day, the dog was better, and it completely recovered. Sixty grains of these extracts in water, administered to a rabbit by means of a funnel, caused death in a few minutes, y)robably from syncope (or asphyxia?) Another branch of physiological evidence imexpectedly presented itself. The deceased, during her fatal illness, had vomited on the floor of her room. An alcoholic e.xtract Avas made of the scrapings of the floor and of the sub- stances deposited between the planks. No mineral poison was found in it. Seventy-five grains of this extract were introduced into the cellular membi'ane of the thigh of a dog. The animal suffered fi-om vomiting and depression of the action of the heart, and died in about twenty-two hours. There was no coma or insensibility at any time. Thirty-one grains of the same extract diffused in water were administered to a rabbit by means of a funnel. In less than three hours after the injection the animal died, having suffered from irregular and depres.sed action of the heart. Sixty grains of an alcoholic extract from the scrapings of the floor, said to be free from vomited matters, had no effect upon an animal. These two extracts of the floor had diffc'rent chemical properties. The first, containing, as it was believed, a portion of the vomited matters, amounted to half an ounce. It was of a brown colour, had a rancid oily odour, and a bitter taste. Its solution was precipitated by tannic acid : it was coloured purple-red by sulphuric, and green by hydrochloric acid. The second Avas coloured, had an oily aspect, but no bitterness. It was not precipitated by tannic acid, and was feebly coloured by the sul[)huric and hydrochloric acids ; the results being different from those obtained with the first extract. It was objected to any inferences from the properties of these extracts, that deceased's room had been formerly occupied by a photographic artist: but it is ex- pressly stated that no noxious mineral substances, such as are used in photo- graphy, were found in them. No attempt was made to procure digitalino from the extracts : the presence of this principle was a matter of inference, from the effects produced : and the reason assigned for the extract derived from the stomach and bowels of deceased having no fatal effect upon animals, was that the quantity of the principle left in the body at the time of death was too small. MM. Tardieu and Roussin deposed at the trial that the deceased had died from a vegetable poison which produces no marked change in the body, which cannot be revealed by chemical analysis, but only by its noxious effects on animals. The eflfects on animals were in this case similar to those caused by digitaline, and without positively alFirming that the deceased woman, Pauw, had died from this poison, there was the strongest presumption that she fell a victim to it. The deceased was quite well the day before her death, and the post-mortem examination of the body proved the absence of any natural cause to account for this sudden death.


[430/1290 b21964944_0430.jp2]

366 rOISONING BY THOKNAPPLE. In reference to the accused, it was proved that he had in his possession a large number of poisons of a deadly kind, including digitaline,—that he had at three different times purchased as much as fifty-two grains of this poison, of which much had been used, and that those quantities were inconsistent with any reasonable medical requirements. As the prisoner was a homoeo- pathic practitioner, the purchase and actual use of such large quantities of so potent a drug were quite inexplicable on any theory consistent with his innocence. On the other hand, the case was equally against him in its moral aspects; it was clearly established that, by reason of the large insurances effected on her life, he had the strongest motive in the death of the woman, that a long cessation of their intimacy had taken place by reason of his marriage with another person, that he had suddenly and without any reason- able grounds renewed his intimacy with the deceased, and the date of her fatal illness was in accordance with these visits thus renewed. In short, Dr. De la Pommerais had the motive, means, and opportunity of destroying the life of this woman by poison, and no theory consistent with his innocence could be suggested, by those who defended him, to explain satisfactorily the mass of moral and medical circumstances which were clearly proved against him. Further, as with some other criminals, he over-acted his part, and by forged letters and correspondence had shoAvn that he had fully anticipated the sudden death of the woman Pauw, and the explanations that might be required of him in order to account for this event. Apart from any questions respecting the speculative character of the medical evidence, there were circumstances proved in this case which were inconsistent with any theory of the innocence of the accused. The jury found him guilty of murder, and he was subsequently executed. Thornapple. (Datura Stramonium.) All parts of this plant are poisonous; but the seeds and fruit are considered to be the most noxious. Symptoms.—The usual effects produced by this poison will be understood from the following cases. A woman, set. 36, took two teacupfuls of infusion of stramonium leaves by mistake for senna tea. In about ten minutes she was seized with giddiness, dimness of sight, and fainting. In two hours she was quite insensible; the pupils were fixed and dilated, all the muscles of the body convulsed, the countenance flushed, and the pulse was full and slow. The stomach-pump was applied, and in the course of a few hours she re- covered,—suffering, however, fi.-om indistinctness of vision and vertigo. (' Med. Gaz.,' 8, 605.) The seeds of this plant are highly poisonous. A boy, set. 5, ate some seeds with a portion of the plant. Soon afterwards, it was observed that his face Avas flushed, and that he staggered as if intoxicated. He vomited and threw up about thirty seeds. His skin was hot and red, the countenance had a Avild and staring expression, the pupils were nearly fully dilated, and insensible to light. The child was restless, in a state of raging delirium, and biting with fury at those who attempted to restrain him. He was unable to stand, and in a state resembling St. Vitus's dance. The pulse could not be counted. The breathing Avas hurried and gasping. He was in- cessantly talking, but without articulating distinctly, and he appeared to be driving aAvay from him imaginary objects. Emetics produced the vomitinf^ of more seeds, and in an hour he began to articulate. He slept restlessly for two hours. Some seeds were passed in the evacuations from the boAvels. In four hours the symptoms had abated, and the boy gradually improved. The pupil did not recover its natural state until after three days. (' New York Journal of Medicine,' 1856; and 'Brit, and For. Med. Rev.,' 1857, vol. 19, p. 497.) In the 'American Journal of Medical Sciences,' April 1864, p.'552, Dr.


[431/1290 b21964944_0431.jp2]

SYMPTOMS AND EFFECTS. 36T Turner describes five cases of poisoning by the seeds, in children under ten years of age. They had eaten them in the scarcely ripe state when they are not very bitter. In one hour and a half two of the children were found to be fully under the influence of the poison. They were lying on their backs, eyes bright, pupils widely dilated and insensible to light; conjunctiva injected, lace deeply suffused and of a dark crimson colour; difficulty of breathing, inability to articulate, and in a state of complete insensibility, broken occasionally by a paroxysm during which they would utter some indistinct sounds and throw the hands about the head as if trying to ward olF some threatening evil. They then fell into a comatose state, but were easily roused into a state of violent excitement: they grasped at imaginary objects; there was picking at the bed- clothes, with paroxysms of excessive laughter. They had no proper control over their limbs, walked with a staggering gait, and fell to the ground as if intoxicated or in a state of complete exhaustion. They recovered under treat- ment in about twenty-four hours. (See also other cases by Dr. Lee, in the same journal, Jan. 7, 18G2, p. 54.) Death may take place although the whole of the seeds are ejected. This happened in a case reported by Mr. Duffin—that of his own child, £et. 2, who swallowed about one hundred seeds of stramonium, Aveighing sixteen grains. The usual symptoms were manifested in an hour, and the child died in twenty- four hours, although twenty seeds had been ejected by vomiting and eighty by purging. (' Med. Gaz.,' vol. 15, p. 194.) Sufficient daturia to destroy life had been absorbed from the entire seeds and carried into the blood. In a case which became the subject of a trial at Osnabriick, a woman ad- ministered to her mother a decoction of the bruised seeds of the thornapple, of which it Avas supposed there were about 125. She very soon became deli- rious, threw her arms about, and spoke incoherently : she died in seven hours. (Henke, ' Zeitschrift der S. A.' 1837, i. H.) The seeds retain their properties notwithstanding exposure to heat: thus the smoking of stramonium-seeds is attended with danger. In the return of the Registrar-General for April 1856, there is the record of one death from this cause. One of the methods of poi- soning adopted by the Hindoos, not so much Avith the intention of destroying life as of facilitating the perpetration of robbery, consists of administering to persons either the powdered seeds, or a strong decoction of them, in curry, or some other highly flavoured article of food. Delirium and insensibility soon follow, and sometimes death is the result; but no suspicion of the real cause appears to be excited. Dr. Brown, of Lahore, states that out of ninety-two of these cases of poisoning no fewer than twenty-one proved fatal, but it is probable that many Avhich result in death are never known, Avhile those Avho survive Avould naturally complain of whatever injury had been done to them while insensible. He observes that the drug has a bitter taste Avhich it generally imparts to the food Avith which it is mixed, and Avhich is sometimes recognized Avhen it is eaten. The symptoms usually occur in about ten minutes after the poison has been taken, although they may be delayed from half an hour to an hour. There is at first dryness in the throat, attended with a feeling of faintness, headache, and giddiness, and the person has difficulty in Avalking straight, and appears as if intoxicated, Avhile at the same time he is very restless. The pupils of the eyes, if examined, are found to be dilated, and he will sometimes complain of indistinctness of vision, and droAvsiness, and he almost ahvays fiills asleep. The sleep may either in- crease to complete insensibility Avith dilated pupils, a flushed flice, and mut- tering delirium, or the patient may aAvake and then become delirious. The delirium is characterized by great restlessness, the person affected frequently moving about, and there is a tendency to go naked and to pick at various objects. The pulse is generally slow, the pupils are dilated, and there ir>


[432/1290 b21964944_0432.jp2]

368 POISONING BY DATURA. APPEARANCES. great thirst. After a time the patient becomes again insensible and is greatly exhaiisted: sometimes convulsions occur with low muttering delirium, and at length he dies. If, as it more fi-equently happens, he recovers, the insensibility persists for a day or more, and the patient remains occasionally in an idiotic state, able to speak, but not to understand for some time longer, and usually }ias no recollection of what has occurred after his last meal. Sometimes vomit- ing is an early symptom, although this is rare. (' Description of Poisons in the Punjab,' 1863, p. 57.) Dr. Chevers has given a very complete account of the Hindoo system of poisoning by dhatoora. ('Med. Jur.' for India, 185G, pp. 121, 549, 591.) It appears that- the Datura fastuosa and alba are the principal sources of the poison in India. The Thugs have employed this poison with the object of rendering their intended victims helpless. As it is administered by skilled professional poisoners in India, it causes a profound lethargy resembling coma, with dilated pupils. The symptoms may continue for two days, and yet recovery take place. He also states that the cases rarely prove fatal. Out of fifty-one instances of poisoning by dhatoora, at the Bombay hospital in one year re- corded by Dr. Giraud, one only proved fatal, and four presented very alarming symptoms. Dr. Chevers notices the early occurrence of insensibility, A man drank two mouthfuls of a poisoned liquid, complained of a bitter taste, and fell down insensible within forty yards of the spot Avhere he had drunk the liquid, and did not recover his senses until the thii'd day after. (Op. cit. p. 137.) In these cases, probably the seeds ai-e given in a large dose, either in solution or in very fine powder. The first stage of poisoning is commonly marked by deli- rium, the patient is restless and wanders about as if in search of something, but from giddiness or great muscular Aveakness he is soon unable to Avalk or even to stand; he talks incoherently, laughs wildly, moves about as if to avoid spectra, and picks or catches inces?antly at real or imaginary objects. He ap- pears as if drawing out imaginary threads fi-om the ends of his fingers, and his antics are of the most varied and ludicrous kind. The pupils are invari- ably dilated, and the spectra are illusions depending on disordered vision. Distant objects appear near to him, and near objects as if highly magnified : he will attempt to grasp a distant object as if it were close at hand, and will start back on a person approaching, as if he thought the person Avas c[uite near to him. In the second stage of poisoning, there is either great droAvsiness or complete stupor, sometimes passing into utter insensibility, Avith stertorous breathing. The third stage of final delirium is similar to the first. (Op. cit. p. 593.) I am indebted to Dr. Irving, of Allahabad, for some additional in- formation respecting the employment of datura by the professional poisoners of India. (' Cases of Food-Poisoning,' &c., 1864.) The effects are generally produced Avithin a quarter of an hour, and those Avho have taken the poisoned food have had little or no recollection of anything that occurred afterAvards. An extract of datura is probably used as one of the methods of ' hocussing' persons by thieves in this country. The dilatation of the pupil, Avith the pecu- liar train of symptoms, above described Avould distinguish this state from ordinary intoxication. The bitter taste of the liquid might excite suspicion ; but if the person is already partially intoxicated, he may be incapable of making any observation of this kind. Appearrnices.—In a Avell-marked case of poisoning by stramonimn-seeds in Avhich death took place in less than eight hours, Mr. Allan found the fol- loAving appearances : great congestion of the vessels of the brain and its mem- branes, the brain firm and highly injected, choroid plexus turgid, ventricles containing serum, substance of the lungs congested, and the heart flaccid. The stomach contained about four ounces of digested food mixed with eighty- nine seeds of stramonium. There Avere tAvo patches of extravassition in the


[433/1290 b21964944_0433.jp2]

CHARACTERS OF THE SEEDS AND LEAVES OF STRAMONIUM. 3G9 6. Slightly magnified by a lens. mucous coat — one on the larger curvature, and the other near the pylorus. Many seeds and fragments were also found in the intestines. ('Lancet,' Sept. 18, 1847, p. 298.) In the Osnabriick case there Avere marks of diffused in- flammation about the cardiac end of the stomach. Dr. Irving describes the appearances met with in the body of one of the professional Indian poisoners, Bassawur Singh, who, in order to lull suspicion, partook of the poisoned food himself. His intended victims became insen- sible : he robbed them and left them to their fate. Afler a time they re- covered their senses and gave information at the police station. The poisoner was found under a tree, about a mile from the place, quite insensible. Remedies were unsuccessfully used, and he died shortly after being appre- hended. On his person was found all the stolen property, besides a quantity of datura seeds. The following were the post-mortem appearances: The pupils were widely dilated : the body was covered with dust as if it had been rolled on the ground. The fingers of both hands were firmly clenched. There was great venous congestion of the brain and membranes: slight effusion of bloody serum under the membranes, chiefly on the right hemi- sphere. Aboiit an ounce of dark fluid blood was found at the base of the skull. The bloody points on a section of the brain were numerous. The ventricles contained a considerable quantity of serum. The choroid plexus was unusually full of blood. In the stomach there was a quantity of food, partially digested, in which were found seeds of datura as well as seeds of the Solanmii Melongeua, Avhich in form they somewhat resembled. (' Cases of Food Poisoning,' &c., 1864. 'Indian Annals of Medical Science,' No. 17.) Analysis.—The seeds of stramonium, from which accidents have most fre- quently occurred, are flattened, kidney-shaped, but half oval, rough, and of a dark-brown or black colour. The seeds are liable to be mistaken for those of capsicum. Dr. Brown thus describes the difference:—' The datura seeds present dots on their exterior, which on ^SFfK?*,,^ !> a microscopical examination are .seen to be composed of convo- luted ridges surrounding spaces. On the capsicum seed these con- voluted ridges run nearly paral- lel to each other, and are joined at right angles by shorter ridges, so that most of the spaces are of an oblong form, and are as lines , _ ° , , Tlx- Seeds of Bntur.a Stramonium curvmg round the seed : but jn «. Natural size, datura, the ridges are more con- Magnified m diameters, voluted and irregular, joining at acute angles and circumscribing irregular spaces.' (' Poisons of the Punjab,' 1863, p. 67.) Of the dry datura stramo- nium, there are about eight seeds to a grain. They are of an oblong kidney- shape, and of a dark-brown or black colour. The seeds of the datura fastuosa, received fi-om Dr. Brown of Lahore, are so similar in size and general appear- ance that a separate illustration of them is quite unnecessary. The seeds of datura alba, also received from Dr. Brown, are larger, flatter, and much lighter coloured, but have similar microscopical characters. These are the H.x!ds which are chiefly used by the Thugs, and the poisoning robbers of India. The leaves of the common datura stramonium are well characterized by their peculiar shape. In the annexed illustration is represented a small leaf of the datura stramonium from a young plant. In the full-grown plant the leaves retain the same characters, but are much larger. (See illustration at p. 370.) B B Seeds of Datura alba (India). a. Natural size.


[434/1290 b21964944_0434.jp2]

DATURIA. rOISONlNG BY LABURNUM. 370 Crystals of Daturia, magnified 30 diameters. Small leaf of Stramonium from a photograph : natural size. Daturia.—Tlie poisonous properties of thornapple are owing to the presence of an alkakiid, daturia, which forms about one per cent, of the dried vegetable. For a comparison of its properties with those of Atropia and Hyoscyamia which it resembles, see Bouchardat, ' Ann. de Thera- pevitique,' 1864, p. 24. This alkaloid crystallizes in long colourless prisms or needles; it has a bitter taste, some- what acrid, and slightly resembling that of to- bacco. It is poisonous. The eighth of a grain killed a sparrow in three hours. When placed on the eye or introduced into the cellular mem- brane of an animal, it is observed, like atropia, to cause dilatation of the pupil. When heated in a tube it is decomposed, and ammonia is evolved as with other alkaloids. It is soluble in water, .and the solution has an alkaline reaction. It is precipitated by tannic acid and by the chloriodide of potassium and mercury. Nitric and hydrochloric acids dissolve it, without producing any change of colour. Sulphuric acid produces a pale rose-red colour with the crystals, which becomes paler when the acid mixture is diluted with water. Laburnum. (Cytisus Laburnum.) Symptoms and Effects.—The bark and seeds of the common Laburnum contain an active poison called Ci/tisine. A case of poisoning by the hark, which was the subject of a trial at Inverness, has been reported by Dr. Christison. ( * Ed. Med. and S. J.' Oct. 1843.) A youth, with the intention of f merely producing vomiting in one of his fellow-servants, a female, put some dry laburnum bark into the broth which was being prepared for their dinner. . The cook, who remarked a ' strong peculiar taste ' in the broth, soon became very ill, and in five minutes was attacked with violent vomiting. The account t of the symptoms is imperfect; for the cause of them was not even suspected imtil six months afterwards. The vomiting continued thirty-six hours ; was accompanied by shivering,—pain in the abdomen, especially in the stomach,— and gieat feebleness, with severe purging. These symptoms continued, more or less, for a period of eight months; and the woman fell off in flesh and strength. At this period she was seen by a physician, who had been called on by the law authorities to investigate the case. She was then suffering from gastro-intestinal irritation, vomiting after food, pain in the abdomen, increased by pressure, purging, tenesmus and bloody evacuations, with other serious symptoms. The medical opinion Avas that she was then in a higlily dangerous state. The woman did not eventually recover until the following April. There was no doubl, from the investigation made by Dr. Ross and Dr. Christison, that her protracted illness was really due to the effects of laburnum-bark. In reference to poisoning by the seeds of laburnum there are but few in- stances recorded. Dr. Traill has described two cases, and Mr. Kake, a former


[435/1290 b21964944_0435.jp2]

LABURNUM SEEDS AND FLOWERS. YEW. 371 pupil, has communicated to me a case of poisoning by the pods and seeds which occurred in September 1851. Two children, the one aged two, and the other three years, had been seen playing together, and on returning home they appeared imwell, and soon afterwards vomited. They had been seen with laburnum pods in their hands, and some seeds with portions of the pods were mixed with the vomited matter. Both children were pale and exhausted, with a slow and somewhat feeble pulse. The pupils were natural. An emetic was given, but no more seeds were ejected: the pulse increased in volume and frequency, and the next day the children had recovered their tisual health. In October 1856, twelve children, at Otley in Yorkshire, were attacked with rigidity of the limbs and other symptoms of poisoning in con- sequence of having sAvallowed these seeds. They recovered under the use of emetics. (' Lancet,' Nov. 1, 1856, p. 497.) In September 1862, two boys swallowed a quantity of laburnum seeds in a cake. In abou^ three-quarters of an hour one was seized with vomiting and ptirging,—pulse weak and frequent,—severe rigors,—muscular twitchings in the face and neck, and great epigastric pain. The pupils were dilated, but there was no headache. Many seeds were vomited. There was a great disposition to sleep, and coldness of the skin. Under treatment they recovered. (' Pharm. Journal,' Oct. 1862, p. 185.) In September 1863, a girl, ast. nine, died at Worcester in consequence of having eaten a few of the seeds. The late Mr. Barber, of Stamford, communicated to me, in June 1848, the par- ticulars of a case which shows that even the Jloivers of this plant are highly noxious. A child between three and four years of age ate twelve laburnum flowers, and in about fifteen minutes it complained of sickness and severe pain in the stomach. The child vomited a quantity of mucus mixed with the yellow petals of the laburnum. An emetic was given : this cleared the stomach, and the child recovered. There was no piu-ging. ('Guy's Hosp. Keports,' Oct. 1850, p. 219.) A case in which a child suffered from symp- toms of a nervous kind by reason of its having eaten laburnum flowers, is described by Mr. North in the ' Medical and Physical Journal,' vol. 62, page 86. Analysis.—The poisonous principle of the laburnum is called Cyiisme. It is difficult of separation, and at present has no well-defined chemical properties whereby it may be identified. Hence, when administered in powder, infusion, or decoction, there are no chemical pro- cesses known by which the poison may be detected. A de- coction of the bark forms a clear light brown liquid, having an acid reaction. It strikes a dark olive-green colour Avith a persalt of iron. Nitric acid renders it lighter. Acetate of lead precipitates it, but the precipitate has none of the properties of meconate of lead. The leaves ^ of the laburnum are well known. An illus- f\ tration of a leaf of its natural size, which is ^ ^ copied from a photograph, is annexed. The seeds are somewhat kidney-shaped, slightly j." siightiy ' ma'gni- Leaf of Laburnum • hooked at the hilum. They shrink in drying, fiedbyaiens. natural size, become dark-coloured, and present irregular depressions on the surface. They have no markings, and are thus easily distinguished from most other poisonous seeds. They are larger than those of datura stramonium. Cytisine is said to be the poison contained in the leaves of an Insect Powder, which is known by the name of Australian or Persian Insect Powder. B B 2


[436/1290 b21964944_0436.jp2]

372 POISONOUS EFFECTS OF YEW LEAVES. Yew. (Taxus Baccata.) Symptoms and Effects.—It has been long known that the berries and leaves of the yew-tree are poisonous to cattle ; they act very enei-getically, and pro- duce death in a few hours, sometimes without vomiting or purging. It is stated by Dr. Percival that a tablespoonful of the fresh leaves was adminis- tered to three children of five, four, and three years of age as a vermifuge. Yawning and listlessness soon succeeded : the eldest vomited a little, and complained of pain in the abdomen, but the other two suffered no pain. They all died within a few hours of each other. A case of poisoning by the berries of this tree was published a few years since by Mr. Hurt, of Mansfield. A child aged three years and a half, ate a quantity of yew-berries about eleven o'clock. In an hour afterwards the child appeared ill, but did not complain of any pain. It vomited part of its dinner, mixed with some of the berries. A medical man was sent for, but the child died in convulsions before he arrived. On inspection, the stomach was found filled with mucus, and the half-digested pulp of the berries and seeds. There were patches of redness in the mucous membrane, and this was so much softened that it could be detached with the slightest friction. The small intestines were also inflamed. In March 1845, a case was reported to the Dublin Pathological Society by Dr. Mollan, in which a lunatic had died from th^'effects produced by yew-leaves. The deceased was observed chewing the plant, probably from that perversion of appetite so commonly observed in insanity, and before the attendants had taken it from him, he had succeeded in swallowing a portion of the masticated juice. He Avas soon afterwards seized Avith giddiness, sudden prostration of strength, vomiting, coldness of the surface, spasms, and irregular action of the heart. He died in fourteen hours. On inspection, the stomach was found much dis- tended,—it contained some yew-leaves. There was emphysema in the sub- mucous tissue, but no other abnormal change : there was some thickening with opacity of the arachnoid, which might have been due to the insanity. (' Dub. Hosp. Gaz.,' May 15, 1845, p. 109.) There is no doubt that the yew is a cerebro-spinal poison. The symptoms produced by the leaves and berries are pretty uniform in character: convul- sions, insensibility, coma, dilated pupils, pale countenance, small pulse, and cold extremities, are the most prominent. Vomiting and purging are also ob- served among the symptoms. In two cases, the subject of one—a girl about five years of age,—died in a comatose state in four hours after she had eaten the berries, and the other, a boy, set. 4 years, died nineteen days after taking the beiTics, obviously from severe inflammation of the bowels. The imme- diate symptoms in the boy were vomiting, purging, coma, convulsions, dilated pupils, huiried respiration, a small pulse, and a cold skiu. (See ' Prov. Jour * Nov. 29, 1848, p. 662, and Dec. 27, p. 708.) ' • There is a vulgar but erroneous notion that the yew-leaves are not poi- sonous when fresh, and that in any case they act only mechanically. A case related above shows the fallacy of the opinion, and the other cases prove that there is a specific poison in the yew, since it exists in the berries as well as in the leaves. If cattle recover from the primary effects on the nervous sy.stem, they are liable to die, after several days, from inflammation of the bowels. On one occasion I examined the viscera of an ox Avhich had obviously died from the effects of yew-leaves. In some parts of the intestines gangrene had taken place. The nature of the poisonous principle is unknown, and it is not certain whether with respect to the berry, the poison is lodged in the pulp or the seed, although it is most i)robably in the latter. Infusion of yew-leaves which


[437/1290 b21964944_0437.jp2]

NOXIOUS EFFECTS OF PRIVET BERRIES. 373 is popularly called yew-tree tea, is sometimes used for the piirpose of procur- ing abortion by ignorant midwives. A case of death from a person drinking this infusion is reported in the registration returns for 1838-9. In the returns for 1840, there is also one death of a female, a;t. 84, referred to her having eaten the berries of the yew. The subject of poisoning by yew-leaves, in reference to their employment for purposes of abortion, has been investigated by MM. Chevallier, Duchesne, and lieynal. (See 'Ann. d'Hyg.' 1855, vol. 2, pp. 94 and 335.) Analysis.—The leaves or beiTies may be found in the stomach. The yew and the savin are the only coniferous poisons which grow in this coun- try. The apex of the leaf of the yew is not so pointed as that of the savin, and the yew-leaf does not possess the peculiar odour of savin when ,. ^ , , - , - ^_ , I'll • 1 1 r. • P Yew-leaves and fragments: natural rubbed. In the annexed illustration the leaf is oi size. the natural size, the engraving having been made from a photograph of the living leaf Yew-berries are seen in autumn ; they are about the size of a pea, of a light red colour, dull on the surface, and translucent. They are open at the top, allowing a hard brown kernel to be seen. This is of an ovoid shape, and it forms the greater part of the berry. The fine red skin contains a colourless and remarkably viscid or adhesive juice, which reddens litmus paper, and has a nauseous sweetish taste. Privet. (Ligustkum Vulgare.) The privet is not commonly enumerated among vegetable poisons. No re- ference is made to this plant in the works of Wibmer, Orfila, Christison, and other writers on toxicology, and yet it would appear, from the subjoined cases for the brief particulars of which I am indebted to Mr. Ward, of Ollerton, that the berries may exert a poisonous action. In December 1853, three children ate the berries of the privet; two of them, a boy of three years of age and a girl of six, eating them rather freely. They suffered fi-om violent purging, and when seen by a medical man the little boy was found pulseless, cold, and before death was frequently and violently convulsed. The girl was in a state of collapse, but rallied a little under treatment: she soon afterwards died con- vulsed. The surviving child, who had only tasted the berries, did not suffer, and she was enabled to point out the shrub, the berries of which they had gathered. So far as I know, these are the only cases on record in which the berries of the privet have proved flital. According to Loudon, they are eaten by birds when other sources of food fail.


[438/1290 b21964944_0438.jp2]

MEDICAL DEFINITION OF A WOUND. 374 WOUNDS AND PEKSONAL INJURIES. CHAPTER 31. SURGICAL DEFINITIONS OF A WOUND INJURY TO THE SKIN —LEGAL DEFINITION IMPLIES IMMEDIATE AND NOT REMOTE INJURY TO THE SKIN IS A DISLOCA- TION OR FRACTURE A WOUND ?—WOUNDS DANGEROUS TO LIFE THE DANGER IMMINENT WOUNDS PRODUCING GRIEVOUS BODILY HARM. When a person is the subject of a wound or external injury, from the effects of which he ultimately recovers, a medical witness is often rigorously examined with respect to the precise nature of the injury, and how far it involved a risk of life.' The answers to these questions may have an important influence on the defence of a prisoner, when the crime is charged under particular forms of indictment. Definition of a Wound.—It may be safely asserted, that we shall look in vain for any consistent definition of a wound, in works on medicine and surgery. A wound is perhaps most commonly defined to be a ' recent solution of continuity in the soft parts, suddenly occasioned by external causes.' Yet they who adopt this view do not regard as woimds ruptures of the liver or spleen, burns by heated bodies, or simple dislocations and frac- tures, although these injuries are strictly comprehended in such a definition. The following definitions of a wound were furnished to me some years since by three eminent surgeons of this metropolis, now deceased. ' A solution of continuity from violence of any naturally continuous parts.' * An external breach of continuity directly occasioned by violence.' ' An injury to an organic texture by mechanical or other violence.' Owing to the unsettled meaning of the word wound, it has happened on more' than one occasion, that medical witnesses have differed in their evidence; and some difficulty has arisen in the prosecution of criminal charges. It has been asserted that, in order to constitute a wound, the skin should always be broken or injured; and this, as we shall see presently, is the interpretation commonly put upon the term by our judges. But the advocates of this de- finition do not regard burns, produced either by heated metals or corrosive liquids, as wounds, although the skin may be broken or destroyed. Tech- nical difficulties of this kind, which only lead to the embarrassment of witnesses and to the acquittal of prisoners charged with serious offences, might be avoided if the medical witnesses of England Avere allowed to adopt the comprehensive definition sanctioned by the legal tribunals of certain States on the Continent, namely, that ' a wound includes any per- sonal injury, suddenly arising from any kind of violence applied externally, whether such_ injury is external or internal.' It may appear contrary to surgical propriety to designate a burn, contusion or fracture as a wound; but the conmion surgical definitions will be found, on examination, to be utterly inconsistent, and to be attended in legal medicine by evil results, inasnuich as tJiey lead to acquittals, not upon the merits of a case, but upon the


[439/1290 b21964944_0439.jp2]

375 LEGAL DEFINITION OF A WOUND. most trivial pretences. This could not happen if the above comprehensive definition were generally adopted. The late Lord Justice Clerk Hope in- formed me that this is the legal signification of a wound in the law of Scotland, and that no injustice has been done or inconvenience occasioned to the prosecution or defence by this general and rational sense of the term. On these occasions and in reference to medical evidence, we are bound to regard the wants of justice rather than the strict rules of surgery. If medico- legal cases fail from difterences respecting the moaning of scientific terms among surgical writers, it is time that some fixed rule should be adopted. While the practice of surgery cannot possibly suffer by such an innovation, the administration of the law will be rendered more efficient. The statute, 14 and 15 Vict. c. 100, has, however, supplied a remedy for some of the evils which have hitherto arisen fi-om a misdescription of pei'sonal injuries in indictments. Legal definition.—It cannot be denied that an alteration in the use of medical terms must, in order to be attended with any good effects, receive the support of our legal authorities. This, probably, would not be long withheld, if good reasons for the change were afforded by medical witnesses. Some learned judges have held that no injury constitutes a wound in law, unless the continuity of the skin is broken ; so that in a case in which blows were inflicted witli a hammer or iron instrument sufficient to break the collar-bone, and violently bruise but not break the skin, it was held not to be a wounding within the statute. {Reg. v. Wood, 'Matthew's Digest,' p. 415.) The Act 1 Vict. c. 85, provided for the punishment of persons guilty of inflicting such severe injuries, but left the legal signification of the Avord wound un- settled. The 14 and 15 Vict. c. 100, is more precise, but this also avoids any legal definition of a wound. In order to remove any difficulty in future cases, and to put an end to conflicting decisions, the Commissioners for codifying the Criminal Law suggested that internal breaches of continuity should be included under the term wound. They have defined a wound to be ' that ivJierebi/ the skin is divided either- externally or internall//.' The late Mr. Justice Talfourd ob- jected to this definition, because, in his opinion, the division of the skin internally without a division externally was impossible. The use of the word 'skin' leads to ambiguity; and, in this instance, it shows that those who frame laws are not sufficiently careful in the selection of professional terms. The skin consists of the cuticle and cutis. It has been held on more than one occasion that an abrasion of the cuticle, or outer skin only, is not a wound. A man Avas tried at the Central Criminal Court in August, 1838, on a charge of cutting and wounding the prosecutor. The prisoner struck the prosecutor a severe blow on the temple with a heavy stone bottle, which was thereby broken in pieces. The i)rosecutor fell senseless, and it was a long time before he recovered from the effects of the violence. The medical witnesses in this case underAvent a rigorous cross-examination by the prisoner's counsel, respecting the meaning of the word 'wound.' They Siiid that there had been a separation of the cuticle or outer skin of the tem- ple, but not of the cutis, and that there was no absolute wound in the usual acceptation of the word. They further deposed that the prosecutor had lost the sight of his left eye, and the hearing of his left ear; and he was for a considerable time in a state of great danger, from which he had scarcely re- covered. The prisoner's counsel contended that the injuries were not such as to constitute cutting and wounding in law. The judges said, that in order that a Avound, in contemplation of laAV, should have been inflicted, it Avas necessary that the lohole skin, and not the mere cuticle, should have been separated and divided ; and as the evidence did not shoAV distinctly that there


[440/1290 b21964944_0440.jp2]

370 INJURIES INVOLVING THE SIvIN AND MUCOUS MEMJiRANE. was such a wound, those counts of the indictment could not be sustained. The prisoner was found guilty of an assault. A division of the cutis or true skin has always been regarded as a wound, whether blood is effused or not. The boundary of the cutis towards the inside of the body is not easily determined ; since there is a gradual transition of the cutis into the subjacent fibrous tissue, in Avhich the fat and sudatory glands are contained. According to Quain and Sharpey ('Elements of Anatomy,' vol. 1, p. 285), the cuti« measures in thickness from a quarter of a line to a line and a half (a lim being about one-twelfth of an inch). It is thicker in some parts than in others. Taking the true skin, or cutis, at the thickness usually assigned, it is impossible to conceive that such a very thin layer of membrane as this can be divided internally without an external division being produced. Allowing the maximum thickness of the eighth of an inch, it would be difficult for any medical man to affirm that only a fractional part of this membrane had been divided internally, when there was no evidence of external separation ; and it would be certainly impossible for him to prove it. What the Commissionei-s probably mean, is a division of the structures beneath the skin. Their defi- nition is, however, vague and unsatisfactory, because it does not reach an important class of cases in Avhich wounds are inflicted not in the skin, but in the mucous membrane lining the outlets of the body. Thus cuts, punctures, or lacerations of the lining membrane of the nostrils, mouth, and throat, rectum and vagina, are undoubtedly wounds, although the skin may not be directly touched by the weapon. Injuries of a serious description have thus been frequently inflicted on females by cutting and pointed instruments : they have been hitherto proi:)erly treated as wounds, but they would not be com- prised under this term by a strict adherence to the proposed definition. Skin and mucous membrane are not regarded by physiologists as one and the same structure. It is, however, satisfactory to find that there is at least one legal case on record, in which injuries to the mucous membrane, not involving the external skin, have been judicially pronounced to be wounds. In Scotland, so far as I know, the matter has never been contested. In the subjoined case the prisoner was charged with maliciously loounding a mare. He had thrust forcibly down the throat of the animal a stone, which had torn the throat and gullet. It was objected that the injury was not a wounding Avithin the sta- tute, the parts injured being internal, and there being no proof of any external blow or violence. The judge who tried the case was of opinion that it fell wiihin the statute. -Blood had flowed from the broken skin or membrane lining the throat, and the stone was forced into the flesh; and it had been held that the injury need not be ' external' to bring the case Avithin the statute. The prisoner was convicted. {Rcrj. v. Bolton, Norwich Summer Assizes, 1849.) Under this head would fall injuries to the brain produced by pointed instruments passed up the nostrils through the ethmoid bone. Other cases, in which the vagina in females has been thus wounded are given, under the section of ' Wounds of the Genital Organs.' (See case, post, p. 38G.) Do all breaches of continuity involving the skin or mucous membrane, fall under the head of wounds ? Burns appear to constitute an exception ; but there is no reason why a burn producing a destruction of the skin, as by a red-hot poker, should not be regarded and treated in law as a wound. No definition of -a wound, medically or legally, can be so contrived as to exclude such an injury. The question, however, mainly to be considered is this May not a breach of continuity be regarded as a Avound, although neither the skin nor the mucous membrane is directly implicated in the injury ? Is a simple dislocation or fracture a wound ? Is a rupture of the bladder, liver, or other organ, suddenly caused by external violence Avithout implicating the skin, to be regarded as a Avound ? Is a compound dislocation or fracture a wound ?


[441/1290 b21964944_0441.jp2]

WOUNDS NOT INVOLVING THE SKIN. 377 No defimtion yet constructed has excluded these last-mentioned injuries, because the skin is always involved. In a case before the Queen's Bench in November, 1847, it was even held that a simple dislocation was a wound. An action was brought against a medical practitioner for negligence in the treatment of a dislo- cation of the arm, and a verdict was returned for the plaintiff. An application was made to the Court for a new trial, on the groimd of a misdirection of the Chief Baron, who tried the case. The declaration alleged that the plaintiff had employed the defendant, who was a surgeon, for the treatment and cure of certain wounds, fractures, bruises, complaints, and disorders; but the evi- dence showed that the defendant had been employed to cure the plaintiff of a dislocated arm. At the close of the plaintiff's case, it was submitted that there was no word in the declaration which was applicable to the case : but this objection was overruled. A dislocation, it Avas argued, was neither a wound, bruise, nor fracture; and the words ' complaint and disorder' were not at all applicable to a surgical case, but to internal complaints Avhich re- quire to be treated medically. Lord Denman, in delivering the judgment of the Court, said, ' It is rather strange that the pleader should have omitted the most appropriate word ; but we think the Chief Baron was quite right.—Rule refused.' In reference to simple fractures, it was held in Rex v. Wood (' 4 C. and P.,' p. 381), that a fracture of the collar-bone was not a wounding within the statute, because the shin Avas not broken. There are, hoAvever, more recent cases in which conflicting decisions have been giA'en. The first of these is Reg. v. Smith (' 8 C. and P.,' 173.) In this case prisoner struck prosecutor Avith an iron hammer on the side of the face. A surgeon from the London Hospital deposed that the loAver jaw Avas broken in two places ; that the shin Avas broken intei-nally but not externallt/. There was not a great deal of blood effused. On the objection being taken that this Avas a fracture and not a Avound Avithin the statute, Denman, C. J., observed, ' If it is the immediate effect of the injury, Ave think Ave cannot distinguish this from the cases already decided;' and Parke, J. (in summing up), said, ' We were of opinion that there was a Avound, and upon consideration, I am more strongly of that opinion than I was at the outset. There must be a Avounding; but if there be a wound (whether there be an effusion of blood or not), it is within the statute whether the Avound is internal or external.' The same point arose in another case. {Reg. v. TFar- man, ' 1 Denison, C. C 183.) This Avas an indictment for inflicting a mortal tvound; and a question arose Avhether it Avas supported by proof of a blow Avhich caused an internal breach of the skin (although externally there A\'^ere only the appearances of a bruise). The death of the deceased had been caused by a single bloAV on the head by a piece of Avood; and the medical witness described the injury as folloAvs : ' I found on examining the head no external breach of the skin, I found a collection of blood in the back part of the head : the deceased died from effusion of blood, which pressed on the brain. On ex- amining the scalp, I found a collection of blood between the scalp and cranium, just above the spot where, Avithin the cranium, I had found the pressure on the brain. I call tliat a contused AVOund with effusion of blood; that is the .same thing as a bruise. The internal part of the skin was broken. Medically, Ave call the breaking of the skin, whether broken externally or internally, a Avound.' This case was reserved for the judges, and considered by Denman, Tindal, Pollock, Alderson, Williams, CresAvell, _ Parke, Coltman, Wightman, Patteson, Erie, and Piatt. All thought that this internal ivound Avas a suffi- cient wound to support the allegation in the indictment. In each of these cases the Court appears to have been misled by the medical Avitnesses affirming that the skin (cutis) was broken internally but not exter- nally. There is no doubt that they intended by this, not the cutis merely, but the areolar fatty tissue and soil parts beneath. Their evidence has, hoAvever,


[442/1290 b21964944_0442.jp2]

378 WOUNDS DANGEKOUS TO LIFE. served to mislead the Commissioners, iind to induce them to propose-a faulty and erroneous definition. I know no instance in which a rupture of the bladder or liver, Avithout any external injury, has been called a wound, although this term might be applied with as much propriety to this kind of injury as to a simple fracture or dislocation. The brain is sometimes lacerated by a blow on the skull which does not break the scalp or the skin of the head. This mi;st, however, be regarded as a wound of the brain; it admits of no other descrip- tion. Two of the definitions given ante, p. 374, include all injuries of this kind. Archbold describes a wounding to be where ' the violence is so great as to draw blood by striking or stabbing with a sword, knife, or other instrument, or by shooting or striking with a cudgel, the fist, or the like;' while ' a wound includes incised, jiunctured, lacerated, contused, or gun-shot wounds.' (' Pleading and Evidence in Criminal Cases,' 15th edition, by Welsby, 1862, pp. 5G7, 572.) In the first part of this quotation, the ' drawing of blood' is made a character of a wound. This is inconsistent with the further statement respecting lacerated, contused, and gun-shot wounds, for these injuries are not necessarily accompanied with the eflfusion of blood: and in some of the most fatal wounds of this class no blood is effused. It appears to me that the best definition which we can at present give to the word ' wound,' whether in a medical or legal sense, is that it implies ' a breach of continuity in the struc- tures of the body, whether external or internal, suddenly occasioned by mecha- nical violence.' This would include injuries to the skin or mucous membrane, dislocations and fractures, whether simple or compound, and ruptures of the viscera. Wounds dangerous to life.—A medical witness is sometimes asked, whether a wound is or is not dangerous to life. In reference to persons charged with an attempt to murder or maim, a Avritten medical opinion, or a deposition, may be demanded of a surgeon by a magistrate, in order to justify the detention of prisoners. The meaning of the words, ' dangerous to Life,'' is left entirely to the prof(3ssional knowledge of a witness. It is not sufficient on these occasions that he should make a naked declaration of the Avound being dangerous to life; he must, if called upon, state to the Court satisfactory reasons for this opinion; and these reasons are rigorously inquired into by counsel for the defence. As a general principle it would not be proper to consider those wounds dangerous to life, in which the danger is not imminent. A wound of a great blood-vessel, of any of the viscera, or a compound fracture with depression of the bones of the head, must in all instances be regarded as bodily injuries dangerous to life; because in such cases the danger is imminent. Unless timely assistance be rendered, these injuries will most probably prove fatal, and, indeed, they often destroy life in spite of the best surgical treatment. When, however, the danger is remote, as in a puncture or laceration of the hand or foot, Avhich may be followed by tetanus, or in a laceration of the scalp, Avhich may be folloAved by erysipelas, or in penetrating Avounds of the orbit, Avhich may be attended by fatal inflammation of the brain or its membranes, the case is somewhat dif- ferent. Such injuries as these are not directly dangerous to life they are only liable to be attended Avith danger in certain cases, and under certain cir- cumstances ; hence the medical opinion must be qualified. The laAv, on these occasions, appears to contemplate the direct and not the future or possible oc- cuiTence of danger; if the last view were adopted, it is clear that the most trivial lacerations and punctures might be pronounced dangerous to life • since tetanus or erysipelas proving fatal, has been an occasional consequence of very slight injuries. A difference of opinion will often exist among medical Avitnesses whether a particular wound is or is not dangerous to life. Unanimity can only be expected Avhen the judgment and experience of the Avitnesses are equal. The rules for forming an opinion in these cases, will, perhaps, be best deduced


[443/1290 b21964944_0443.jp2]

NOTES OF DYING DECLARATIONS. 379 fi-om the results of the observations of good surgical aiithorities in relation to injuries of different parts of the body. This will form a subject for considera- tion hereafter. Di/iiuj declarations.—The wound may be of such a nature as to cause death speedily, so that a practitioner may arrive only in time to see the wounded person die. In this case, the dying person may make a declaration or state- ment as to the circumstances under which the wound was inflicted : he may also mention the names of the parties by whom he was assiiulted. This dyiiKj declaration or statement, according to the circumstances under which it is made, may become of material importance in the prosecution of a party charged with homicide. It is therefore proper that a practitioner should observe and make notes of the exact condition of the dying person: whether, at the time he makes the statement, he is under the conviction that he must die, either expressed in language or implied by his conduct. According to some authorities, it is not necessary that a man should declare that he believes himself to be dying, in order to render his statement admissible; but he must, at the time of making it, be under the full conviction of approaching death. The question respecting the admissibility of a dying declaration was argued in the Court of Exchequer, January, 1845, in Reg. v. Howell^ when Alderson, B., said it was not necessary that the deceased should be in articulo mortis, or even that he should think so. It is enough if he thinks he shall die of the sickness under which he labours. (' Law Times,' Jan. 25, 1845, p. 317.) When it is made clear to the Court, by medical or other testimony, that all hope of life was lost, the statement will be received as evidence against an accused person ; for the law supposes, that in the act of dying, all interest in this world is taken away, and that the near contemplation of death has the same powerful effect upon the mind, as the solemn obligation of an oath. It is presumed that there can be no disposition on the part of a dying person to wilfully misrepresent facts, or to state what is false. Much, therefore, often depends on the conduct of a medical practitioner under such circumstances, for the usual method of testing the truth of a state- ment by cross-examination is, of course, out of the question : it must, if ad- mitted at all, be received as it was made. It was formerly believed, that if the person at the time of making the statement had still some hope of recovery, it would not be legally admissible. This question was raised in Mr. Seton's case {Reg. v. Pym, Hants Lent Ass., 1846). The deceased had been told by his medical attendant. Dr. Stewart, that there was 'not the least hope of recovery.' He then made a statement, and two or three hours after, he asked the surgeon whether he thought he was better; but his (the witness's) conviction was that he then believed that his immediate death was approaching. Counsel for the prisoner objected that this declaration was not admissible. It plainly appeared, from the question put by the deceased, that he had not given up all hope of recovery, but that he still thought he might recover. {C/iristie's case, 2 ' Russ. on Crimes,' 754 ; Bonnei-'s case, ib. 759 ; and 6 ' Car. and P.,' 386 ; FagenCs case, 7 ' Car. and P.' 238.) 'Erle, J.: I think the evidence is admissible. The principle is that a person who speaks with the conviction that his death is fast approaching, speaks under such a sense of responsibility, that the law presumes that he will tell the truth. Here Mr. Seton had a firm belief that his death was fast approaching. Upon the answer of the surgeon, he burst into tears, and thanked the medical men for their exertions. It has, no doubt, been held in some cases that all hope must be given up, but this is now decided not to be necessary. Indeed, if it were so, no declarations could be received, for scarcely a human being could be found, in any circumstances, who would not retain some hope. The law admits these declarations, not because recovery is impossible, but because there is the conviction of approaching death. Mr.


[444/1290 b21964944_0444.jp2]

RULES REGARDING DHNG DECLARATIONS. 380 Seton was shown to be in tins state; tlic evidence is admissible. The state- ment was then received.' (' Law Times,' March 21, 1846, p. 500.) It is not, therefore, necessary, to render the declaration valid, that the person making it must entertain ' no hope of recovery.' At the Special Commission in Ireland (Jan. 1848, Reg. v. Butler), a declaration was admitted where the words were, that the deceased entertained ' little or no hope' of recovery. In Reg. v. Bayley ('Exchequer Chamber,' Jan. 1857), in which it appeared that the surgeon had given some hope to the dying person before the declara- tion was made, while the declarant stated that he did not himself believe that lie could recover ultimately, its reception was objected to on the part of the prisoners because the surgeon had given the man some hope. He died two days afterwards. Pollock, C. B., ruled that the real belief of the dying man was the question, and here he had said, notwithstanding the opinion of the surgeon, he believed he could not recover. In the case of Reg. v. Harvey (Exeter Summer Assizes, 1854), the chief evidence against the prisoner consisted of certain statements made by the deceased. They were admitted by Wightman, J., because it appeared clearly from the evidence that when they were made, deceased had expressed an opinion that she should die shortly, and had not changed that opinion. Her whole conduct intimated that she had no hope of recovery. It was observed on this occasion that the medical and other witnesses were more desirous of telling the deceased her state, than of ascertaining what her own opinion was. It is no part of the duty of a medical witness to form a judgment on this important subject. He should give the statement as it Avas made, and leave the Court to decide upon its admissibility from the circumstances care- fully observed by him with respect to the condition of the patient. He should not render himself officious in extracting information. He should receive that which is voluntarily uttered, and, either immediately or on the earliest possible opportunity, write down the statement in the identical words, carefially avoiding his own interpretation or any paraphrase of them. On no account should leading questions be put — and any question should be simply confined to the pui'pose of explaining what may appear ambiguous or con- tradictory in the declaration itself It is well known that when death takes place from violence, especially when this proceeds from loss of blood or a wound of the head, delirium is apt to supervene, or the intellect of the dying person becomes confused. Under these circumstances, great caution should be used in receiving a declaration, since it may lead to the implication of innocent persons. It is also proper to remark, that the identity of a person is, iinder these circumstances, liable to be mistaken ; and that it is in general an injudicious proceeding to take a suspected party before one Avho is dying, in order that he may be identified. A fatal mistake of this kind was made many years since in London. A woman was maltreated by some men on Kennington Common. She was taken to St. Thomas's Hospital, and while dying from the effects of the violence, a suspected party was brought before her, as one of the supposed assailants. She stated that he was one of those who had assaulted her. The man was tried, upon her declaration respecting his identity—found guilty and executed; but a year after the execution, his innocence was satisfactorily established by the discovery of the real murderers ! In Reg. v. Qualter (Stafford Lent Assizes, 1854), the escape of a criminal was attributed to the neglect of the medical attendant in reference to a dying declaration. The deceased was grossly ill-treated, as it was alleged, by the prisoner and others. He lingered from the 19th of June until the 8th of August, 1853, when he died from the injuries received. On his death-bed he made certain statements implicating the prisoner, and upon these, the case for the prosecution chiefly rested. Qualter was tried for the murder. The


[445/1290 b21964944_0445.jp2]

WOUNDS TRODUCING GRIEVOUS BODILY HARM. 381 deceased told his wife that he knew he should not recover, but as the declaration against Quaker was made previously to this, it Avas of course inadmissible. A similar declaration affecting the prisoner was subsequently made by the deceased to the medical attendant; and it seems that this witness had told the wife that her husband would not recover, but not in the presence of the deceased : hence the declaration made by deceased to him was inad- missible, and the prisoner was acquitted. There was a want of proof, in fact, that either declaration had been made by the dying man while he was under the conviction of approaching death. Had the surgeon announced to the deceased that he could not recover, or had he made the announcement to the wife in his presence and hearing, the declaration might have been received. It is certainly advisable, in all cases when a medical man perceives that the recovery of a wounded person is impossible, that he should take the first opportunity of stating his opinion to the wounded man in the presence of others, so that the ends of justice may not be defeated by reason of the non- observance of these legal forms. (See the case of Heg. v. Harvey, Exeter Summer Assizes, 1854.) Wounds causing grievous bodily haiin.—A wound may not be dangerous to life, but it may have produced ' grievous bodily haim.^ This question is sometimes put, although the usual practice is to leave it to be drawn by the jury as an inference from a professional description of the injury. These words have a vague signification; but it would perhaps be diflicult to substitute for them others less open to criticism. They evidently refer to a minor description of offence, and are applied commonly to those injuries which, while they do not actually place life in danger, may be attended with considerable personal inconvenience, or be in some way detrimental to the health of the wounded party. It is always a question for a jury, whether the intent of the prisoner, in inflicting a wound, was or was not to produce grievous bodily harm. Sometimes the nature or the situation of a wound, as well as the kind of weapon used, will at once explain the intent: so far the medical witness may assist the Court, by giving a plain description of the injury, as well as of the consequences with which it is usually attended. It may happen either that the wound itself is not of a serious nature, and yet the intention of a prisoner may have been to do grievous bodily harm to the wounded person, or, as in the following case, the injury may be really serious, and yet the prisoner may not have intended to do grievous bodily harm. A man was indicted for feloniously wounding a girl, with intent to dogi-ievous bodily harm. He kicked her in the lower part of her abdomen,—the surgeon described the injury as of the most serious character, and said that at one time he con- sidered the life of the prosecutrix in danger. She was still suffering, and would probably feel the effects of the injury for the rest of her life. The judge, in summing up the case, told the jury that the material question for them to consider was the intent of the prisoner. It M^as not because serious injury was the result of a prisoner's act, that they were therefore to infer his intention was to do that injury; and they were to judge, from all the circumstances, whether, at the time he kicked the prosecutrix, he intended to do her grievous bodily harm, as was imputed to him by the indictment, or whether he was merely guilty of a common assault. He was found guilty of a common assault. (Reg. v. Haynes, Central Criminal Court, September 1847.) In cases of this description, the intent with which a wound was inflicted must be made out by evidence of a non-medical kind. (See also the case of Heg. v. Maslin, Devizes Summer Assizes, 1838.) These are the principal medico-legal questions connected with wounds when the wounded person is seen while living. We will suppose, however, that the wounded person is found dead, and an examination of the body is


[446/1290 b21964944_0446.jp2]

382 MEDICAL EXAMINATION OF WOUNDS ON A DEAD BODY. required to be made. The most difficult part of the duty of a medical jurist now commences. Among the numerous questions which here present them- selves, the first whicli demands examination, is whether the wound was inflicted on the body before or after death. CHAPTER 32. EXAMINATION OF WOUNDS IN THE DEAD BODY—ALL THE CAVITIES SHOULD BE IN- SPECTED—ACQUITTALS FROM THE NEGLECT OF THIS RULE —CHARACTERS OF A AVOUND INFLICTED DURING LIFE OF A WOUND MADE AFTER DEATH EXPERI- MENTS ON AMPUTATED LIMBS—CAUTION IN MEDICAL OPINIONS—WOUNDS OR INJURIES UNATTENDED WITH BLEEDING —ECCHYMOSIS FROM VIOLENCE EVIDENCE FRO:\I ECCHYMOSIS—ECCHYMOSIS FROM NATURAL CAUSES—IS ECCHYMOSIS A NECESSARY RESULT OF VIOLENCE ? Examination of Woimds.—In examining a wound on a dead body, it is pi*oper to observe its situation, extent, length, breadth, depth, and direction :— whether there is about it effused blood, either liquid or coagulated, and whether there is ecchymosis, i. e. a livid discolouration of the skin from the effused blood. It should also be ascertained whether the surrounding parts are swollen, whether adhesive matter or pus is effused, whether the edges of the wound are gangrenous, or any foreign substances are present in it. Care must be taken that putrefaction is not mistaken for a gangrenous condi- tion of the wound. The wound may be examined by gently introducing into it a bougie, and carrying on the dissection around this instrument, avoiding as much as possible any interference with the external appearances. The preservation of the external form will allow of a comparison being made at any future time between the edges of a wound and a weapon found on a sus- pected person. Of all these points notes should be taken, either on the spot or immediately afterwards. In the dissection, every muscle, vessel, nerve, or organ involved in the injury should be traced and described. This Avill enable a witness to answer many collateral questions that may unexpectedly arise during the enquiry. Another point should be especially attended to. A medical practitioner has frequently contented himself by confining his dissection to the injured part, thinking that on the trial of an accused party the questions of counsel would be limited to the situation and extent of the Avound only, but this is a serious mistake. If the cause of death be at all obscure, on no account should the inspection be al^andoned until all the im- portant organs and cavities of the body have been closely examined ; since it may be affirmed that a natural cause of death might have existed in that organ or cavity which the medical Avitness had neglected to examine. {Reg. V. Solloway, Abingdon Aut. Ass., 18G0.) It rests with the practitioner to disprove the probability thus urged by counsel, but he is noAv destitute of fiicts on Avhich he can base an opinion,—legal ingenuity Avill triumph, the Avitness will be discomfited, and the prisoner, of whose guilt there may be, morally speaking, but little doubt, will have the benefit of his inattention, and be acquitted by the jmy. In the medical reports on the examination of the bodies of Avounded per- sons, care should be taken to avoid the introduction of any remarks in the form of inferences ft-om the flicts of the case. At the trial of McLachlan (Glasgow Sept. Circuit, 1862), Lord Deas objected to the statements in the medical report, ' that tlic body of deceased had been found under circum- stances of gi-eat suspicion,' and ' that there were marks of a severe conflict.' When the Avitness Avas cross-examined on the medical facts which had led him to the conclusion that there had been a ' severe conflict,' it resolved


[447/1290 b21964944_0447.jp2]

CAREFUL INSPECTION OF THE BODY. 383 itself into the statement that there were marks (of blood) on the flags, which indicated that the body had been dragged along the floor after death; but he was unable to mention any medical facts by which this form of expression could be justified. Inferences of this kind should, as a rule, be entirely excluded from medical reports. In making an inspection of the body, the state of the stomach should not be overlooked. Death may have been apparently caused by violence, and yet really be due to poison. Wildberg was called upon to examine the body of a girl who had died while her father was chastising her for stealing, apparently from the effects of the violence. On the arms, shovdders, and back, many marks of violent treatment were found ; and under some of them blood was effused in large quantity. The injuries, although severe, did not, however, appear sufficient to account for sudden death. He therefore proceeded to ex- amine the cavities, and on opening the stomach, he found it very much inflamed, and lined with a white powder, which was proved to be arsenic. It turned out that on the theft being detected, the girl had taken arsenic for fear of her father's anger : she vomited during the flogging, and died in slight convulsions. Upon this, Wildberg imputed death to the arsenic, and the man was discharged. Dr. Geoghegan communicated to me a case which occurred in Ireland in 1853, in which a gentleman having taken eleven grains of strychnia, threw himself out of a window, and sustained great bodily injury. The surgeon finding so much more spasm than could be accounted for by the violence sustained, discovered the real state of the case from the patient's con- ' fession. There was also evidence of the purchase of the poison. The cause of death may be easily assigned in such cases when the circumstances are knoAvn ; but it is evident that without proper enquiry and great care in con- ducting examinations after death, the apparent may be sometimes mistaken for the real cause. (For some interesting cases and good practical suggestions on this subject, see Belloc, ' Cours de Med. Leg.' 148.) In the summer of 186-1, an inquest was held at Kilburn on a young man Avho committed suicide by throwing himself from a window. He lived sufficiently long to inform his medical attendant, Mr. Nelson, that he had first taken corrosive sublimate, he then cut open his wrist that he might bleed to death, and finding this in- effectual, he threw himself from the Avindow. Even when there may be no suspicion of poisoning, it will be necessary to observe the state of the stomach and its contents—i. e. to determine whether it contains food, the nature of the food, and the degree to which it may have undergone digestion. In Rerj. v. Spicer (Berks Lent Assizes, 1846), the falsehood of one part of the prisoner's defence was made evident by an examination of the stomach. The deceased was found dead at the foot of a stair. The prisoner stated that after he and his wife had had their dinner, he heard a ilill. The Avoman had died instan- taneously, and the fall Avas heard by neighbours at or near the dinner-hour. Mi\ Plooper, the medical witness, found the stomach quite empty ; there was no trace of food. It was therefore clear that this part of the prisoner's story was untrue, as, had the deceased died immediately after dinner, some portion of undigested food would have been found. Description of Wounds.—It is impossible to impress too strongly on the mind of a medical witness, that in describing the wounds which he has found on the examination of a body, he should employ plain and simple langu^ige, and avoid as much as possible the use of technical or professional terms. The natural desire of a good witness is to make himself understood : but thi.s cannot be accomplished if he clothes his ideas in language which is incompre- hensible to educated men of the legal profession, and a fortiori to the class of men Avho constitute juries. There are few Assizes wliich do not afford many illustrations of tlie injury done to scientific evidence, and the clear under-


[448/1290 b21964944_0448.jp2]

384 DESCRIPTION OF WOUNDS. CHARACTERS IN THE LIVING. standing of a case, by the technical language in which it is given. A Coiirt may be told that the ' integuments were reflected from the thorax, and the costal cartilages laid bare, when a wound was found which had penetrated through the anterior mediastinum,' and had involved the arch of the aorta, &c. A simple cut in the skin may be described as ' an incision in the integu- ments.' On a trial for an assault which took place at the Assizes, some years since, a medical witness, in giving his evidence, infoi-med the Court that on examining the prosecutor, he found him suffering from a severe contusion of the integuments under the left orbit, with great extravasation of blood and ecchymosis in the surrounding cellular tissue, Avhich was in a tumefied state. There was also considerable abrasion of the cuticle. ' Judge: You mean, I suppose, that the man had a bad black eye. Witness : Yes. Judge : Then why not say so at once ? ' It would be easy to multiply examples of this kind : they probably occur more freqiiently in evidence respecting wounds than in other cases. A medical witness should, for his own credit and for that of the profession to which he belongs, employ plain and simple language in describ- ing a wound, as well as in giving his evidence generally. Characters of a wound inflicted during life.—If Ave find about a wound marks of gangrene, the effusion of adhesive or purulent matter, or if the edges are swollen and enlarged, and cicatrization has commenced, it is not only certain that the injury must have been inflicted before death, but that the person must have lived some time afler it was inflicted. Marks of this description will not, however, be commonly found when death has taken place within ten or twelve hours from the infliction of the injuiy. A wound which proves fatal within this period of time will present throughout, much the same characters. Thus, supposing it to have been incised, there will be traces of more or less bleeding, the blood having chiefly an arterial character, and it will be found coagulated where it has fallen on surrounding bodies. The edges of the wound are everted, and the muscular and cellular tissue around is deeply reddened by effused blood. Coagula or clots are found adhering to the wound, provided it has not been interfered with. The principal characters of a wound inflicted during life are, then, the following : 1. Eversion of the edges owing to vital elasticity of the skin. 2. Abundant haemorrhage or bleeding, often of an arterial character, with general diffi^sion of blood in the surrounding parts. 3. The presence of coagula. The wound may not have involved any vessel, and there may be no appearance of bleeding, still the edges will be everted, and the muscles and skin retracted. By an observation of this kind made on the body of a new-born child (Case of Elphiclc, March, 1848), Mr. Prince was enabled to state that the child was living when it was inflicted, an opinion afterwards confirmed by the confession of the mother. Characters of a ivound made after death.—If the wound on a dead body be not made until twelve or fourteen hours have elapsed from the time of death, it cannot be easily mistaken for one prodiiced during life. Either no blood is effused, or it is of a venous character, i. e., it may have proceeded from some divided vein. The blood is commonly liquid, and does not coagulate as it fiills on surrounding bodies, like that poiu-edoutof a wound in the livin"-. The edges are soft, yielding, and destitute of elasticity; they are therefore in close approximation. The cellular and muscular tissues around are either not infiltrated with blood, or only to a very partial extent. There are no coagula within the wound. In experimenting upon amputated limbs, I have found these characters possessed by a wound produced two or three hours afler death, although they are best seen Avhen the Avound is not made until after the body has lost all its animal heat. In wounds on the dead body, divided arte- ries have no marks of blood about them, while in the living body the fafcvl bleeding commonly proceeds from these vessels. Hence in a wound on


[449/1290 b21964944_0449.jp2]

385 ^YOUNDS OF THE LIVING AND DEAD BODY. tlie living, it Avill be found that the surrounding vessels are empty. The chief characters of a wound after death are, therefore: 1. Absence of copious bleeding. 2. If there is bleeding it is exclusively venous. 3. The edges of the -wound are close, not everted. 4. There is no diffusion of blood in the cellular tissue. 5. There is an absence of coagula. But it may happen that a wound has been inflicted soon after the breath has left the body, and while it Avas yet warm. The distinction between a wound then made and one made during life, is not so well marked as in wounds inflicted at a later period after death. Observations of this kind on the human subject must of course be purely accidental; and there are many obstacles to the performance of ex- periments on the recently dead. I, tlierefore, selected limbs immediately after amputation, and there is no reason to suppose that the results obtained in these cases, would differ widely from those derived fi-om experiments made on the entire body. Wounds on the dead body.—In the first experiment, an incised wound about three inches in length, was made in the upper part of the calf of the leg two minutes after its separation from the body, by which the thick muscles of the calf and the fascia (membrane) covering the deep-seated layer of the leg, were divided. At the moment that the wound was made, the skin re- ti-acted considerably, causing a protrusion of the adipose substance beneath ; the quantity of blood which escaped was small,—the cellular membrane, by its sudden protrusion forwards, seemed mechanically to prevent its exit. The wound was examined after the laps3 of twenty-four hours : the edges Avere red, bloody, and everted; the skin was not in the least degree swollen, but merely somewhat flaccid. On separating the edges, a small quantity of fluid blood escaped, but no coagula Avere seen adhering to the muscles. At the bottom of the Avound, hoAvever, and in close contact with the fascia, was n small, quantity of coagulated blood; but the coagula Avere so loose as readily to break doAvn under the finger. In a second experiment, ten minutes after the separation of the member from the body, an incision of similar ex- tent was made on the outer side of the leg, penetrating through the pei'onei into the flexor longus poUicis of the deep-seated layer of nuiscles. In this case the skin appeared to have already lost its elasticity, for the edges of the Avound became but slightly everted, and scarcely any blood escaped from it. On examining the leg tAventy-four hours afterwards, the edges of the in- cision Avere pale, and perfectly collapsed, presenting none of the characters of la Avound inflicted during life. Still, at the bottom of the Avound and inclosed by the divided muscular fibres, there were some coagula of blood ; but these were certainly fewer than in the former experiment. A portion of liquid blood had evidently escaped owing to the leg having been moved. Other ex- periments Avere performed at a still later period after the removal of the limbs; and it Avas found that in proportion to the length of time suffered to elapse before the production of a Avound, so were the appearances less dis- tinctly marked, that is to say, the less likely Avere they to be confounded with similar injuries inflicted upon a living body. When the incised wound was not made until two or three hours after the remoA^al of the limb, although a small quantity of liquid blood Avas effused, no coagula Avere found. It is necessary to remember that, when an incised wound is the cause of ileath, the person dies either immediately, in which case there is copious bleeding from the wounded organ or some large vessel, or he dies after some time, in Avhich case, as the Avound continues to bleed during the time that he survives, the longer he lives the more copious Avill be the effusion of blood, hi a Avound inflicted after death, and Avhile the body is warm, nothing of this kind is observed. Unless the Aveapon injure one of the large veins, the bleed- ing is always slight, so that the quantity of blood lost may assist us in deter- c c


[450/1290 b21964944_0450.jp2]

B8G WOUXDS UNATTENDED WITH ILEMOKRHAGE. mining Avliether the wound was made during life or after deatli. Wlien the body has been moved, and all marks of blood effaced by washing, rules of this kind cannot serve a medical witness :—the time at which the wound was actually inflicted must then be deduced from other circumstances. In the case oi Greenacre, who was convicted in 1837 of the murder and mutilation of a female, this formed a material part of the medical evidence. The head of the deceased had been severed from the body, and the question was, whether this severance had taken place during life or after death. The prisoner alleged in his defence that it was after death ; but the medical evidence went to esta- blish that the head must have been cut off while the Avoman was living, but probably after she had been rendered insensible by a blow on that part, the marks of which were plainly visible. This medical opinion was founded on two circumstances. The muscles of the neck were retracted, and the head was completely drained of blood, showing that a most copious and abundant lloAV must have ensued at the time of separation, and therefore indicating that the circulation was probably going on at that time. On cutting olF a head after death a small quantity of blood may escape from the jugular veins: but this soon ceases, and the quantity lost is insufficient to affect materially the contents of the cerebral vessels. The chief medical witness, Mr. Gird- wood, expressed himself with proper caution, by stating, in answer to a ques- tion from the judge, that all the wounds in the neck had been inflicted either during life or very shortly after death, Avhile the body still preserved its warmth. The circumstantial evidence tended to show that the deceased was first stunned, and that her head was cut off while she was in a state of stupor. In any case in which it is doitbtful whether a Avound Avas inflicted on a living or dead body, it Avill be proper to adopt the same cautious mode of expressing a medical opinion : since it must be remembered there are no decisive characters by Avhich Avounds of the kind referred to can be distin- guished ; and a medical Avitness is as likely to be Avrong as right in selecting either hypothesis. It is a considerable step in evidence, Avhen Ave are able to assert, that a particular Avound, found on a dead body, must have been inflicted either during life or imviediatehj after death ; for it can scai-cely be suppose^ that in a case calling for criminal investigation, any one but a murderer Avould think of inflicting upon a body immediately after death a Avound Avhich Avould assuredly have produced fatal eftects had the same person received it Avhile living. So soon as such an opinion can be safely expressed by a Avitness, circumstantial evidence Avill often make up for that Avhich may be, medically speaking, a matter of uncertainty. Wounds or injuries unattended icith hcemorrhage.—The copious effusion of blood has been set doAvn as a Avell-marked character of a severe Avound received (luring life ; but this observation applies chiefly to cuts and stabs. Lacerated and contused Avounds of a severe kind are not ahvays accompanied by much bleeding, even Avhen a large blood-vessel is implicated. It is Avell knoAvn, that a Avhole member has been torn from the body, and that little blood has been lost; but in such cases coagula or clots of blood are commonly found adhering to the separated parts, a character Avhich indicates that the Avound Avas inflicted either (luring life or soon after death, Avliile the blood Avas Avarm and fluid. When a lacerated or contused Avound involves a highly vascular part, although no large l)lood-vessel_may be implicated, it is liable to cause death by loss of blood. In a case tried at the Liverpool Winter Assizes, 1847 {Reg. v. Cawley), the prisoner Avas charged Avith having caused the death of his Avife by kicking her in the loAver part of the abdomen. Copious bleeding folloAved, and in spite of medical assistance the Avoman died very shortly afterwards, evidently fronr exhaustion produced by the loss of blood. It was stated in evidence that there Avas no external laceration, but an cxauiination of the body showed that


[451/1290 b21964944_0451.jp2]

ECCIlYiMOSIS FROM VIOLENCE. a contused •wound (of the genitals) had been produced internalli/, and liad given rise to tatal bleeding. There is nothing at all remarkable in su(;h a result, considering the great vascularity, i. e. the abundance of small blood- vessels, in these parts of a female. Ecchymosis from violence.—Contusions and contused wounds are commonly accompanied by a discolouration of the surroiuiding skin, to which the term ecchymosis (cc^ww, to pour out) is applied. The subject of ecchymosis is of considerable importance in legal medicine, since it has often given rise to medical difficulties and complicated questions. It consists essentially in the extravasation or effusion of blood generally from small ruptured vessels, into the siu-rounding cellular membrane beneath the skin. An ecchymosis is commonly superficial, affecting only the layers of the skin, and showing itself externally, either immediately or in the course of a short time, in the form of a deep blue or livid red patch. According to Dr. Chowne, the former colour is met with in the ecchymosis slowly produced; Avhile that which is the im- mediate result of violence is i-ed or livid red. In some instances the ecchymosis is deep-seated, the blood being poured out among the muscles and beneath the fascifB or membranes enclosing them : its extent cannot then be so readily de- termined by the external discolouration, for this is commonly slight, and it may appear only after the lapse of some hours, or even two or three days. Some- times the ecchymosis shows itself not over the immediate seat of injury or around it, but at some distance from it. Dr. Chowne met with an instance in Avhich a young man received a severe bruise on the inner side of the ankle. In two days, ecchymosis appeared around the outer ankle. When blood has once escaped from the small vessels, it will sooner or later diffuse itself where it meets with the least resistance, and the layei-s of skin in the part struck, may become so condensed by the blow, that the blood is diffused in the cellular membrane of the adjoining parts. Mr. Syme met with a case in which a compound fracture of the tibia, about one-third down, was produced by the Avhcel of a carriage passing over the leg of a woman. There was no ecchy- mosis around the seat of injury, but after some days, the skin of the knee and lower part of the thigh became discoloured. ('Ed. Med. and Surg. Jour.' Oct. 1830.) Ecchymosis may sometimes proceed from causes irrespective of the direct application of violence to the skin. Strong muscular exertions, the act of vomiting, and many other conditions, may give rise to a rupture of the minute vessels, and to an effusion of blood in parts which have been stretched or compressed. I have known it to have been produced to a great extent around the knee (without any blow), from the stretching of the ligament of the kneepan in an individual who was trying to save himself from suddenly fidling forwards with his knee bent under him. Such cases are conmionly recognized by there being no mark of mechanical injury about the part; the skin is smooth and imabraded. Ecchymosis strictly signifies an effusion or a pouring out of blood; but the effusion may be so deep-seated as not to present any external discolouration (ecchymosis). It is scarcely necessary to observe that the term effusion applies to internal as well as to external hemorrhage, and unless this be borne in mina medical testimony may be wholly misunderstood. Dr. Christison states that some years ago, on a trial in the High Court of Justiciary at Edinburgh, the public prosecutor attempted to prove that the person assailed had been wounded to the effusion of blood, which, according to the law of Scotland, is an aggrava- tion of guilt in such cases. When the principal medical witness Avas examined as to the injuries inflicted, he Avas asked whether any blood had been effused; and he replied that a good deal must have been effused. But he meant effu- sion of blood under the skin, constituting the contusion or bruise described, while the Court at first received the answ.er as implying that tliere had been- c c 2


[452/1290 b21964944_0452.jp2]

r>88 APPEARANCE OF ECCIIYMOSIS. CHANGES OP COLOUR. a considerable loss of blood from a wound externally. The ambiguity was, however, detected. (' Edinburgh Monthly Journal,' Nov. 1851, p. 454.) This case shows the importance of medical evidence being given in language intelli- gible to all. At the same time the amount of personal injury inflicted is not at all dependent on the external effusion of blood. The assault may be of a most grievous kind, and yet no blood be effused through a wound in the skin. Violence inflicted on a living body may not show itself under the form of ecchymosis until after death. A case of this kind was communicated to me by Mr. J. Steavenson. A man received from behind several kicks on the lower part of the abdomen, which caused a rupture of the bladder, and death by peritonitis. He died in about thirty-five hours; but there was no ecchy- mosis in the seat of the blows, i. e. in the pubic and lumbar regions, until after death. Dr. Hinze met with a case of suicidal hanging, in which it was ob- served that ecchymosis appeared in the course of the cord only after death. (See ' Hanging.') It has been remarked by Devergie that ecchymoses are often concealed on the bodies of the drowned, when first removed from water, owing to the sodden state of the skin; they may become apparent only after the body has been exposed for some days, and the water has evaporated. A medical jurist must guard against the error of supposing that when a blow has been inflicted on a living person, it is necessary that the individual who is maltreated should survive for a long period in order that ecchymosis should be produced. Among numerous instances proving the contrary, the case of the Duchess of Praslin (August 1847) may be mentioned. This lady, who was assassinated by her husband, was attacked while asleep in bed. The nvuuber of woimds on her person (thirty) showed that there had been a mortal struggle, which, however, could not have lasted more than half an hour. Yet, on in- spection, there were the marks of numerous ecchymoses, which had resulted from the violent use of a bruising instrument. (' Ann. d'Hyg.' 1847, t. 2, p. 377.) Changes of colour.—The changes which take place in the colour of an ecchymosed spot are worthy of attention, since they will serve to aid the witness in giving an opinion on the probable time at which a contusion has been inflicted. After a certain period, commonly in eighteen or twenty-four hours, the blue or iivid margin of the spot is observed to become lighter; it acquires a violet tint, and before its final disappearance it passes successivelv through shades? of a green, yellow, and lemon colour. During this time, the spot is much increased in extent, but the central portion of the ecchymosis which received tlie violence is always darker than the circumference. These changes have been referred by Chaussier and others to the gradual dilution of tlie serous portion of the effused blood by the fluid of the cellular membrane, and its slow and uniform dispersion throughout the cells. The colour is finally entirely removed by the absorption of the blood. The extent and situation of the ecchymosis, the degree of violence by which it has been produced, as well as the age and state of health of the person, are so many circumstances which may influence the progress of these changes. Thus an ecchymosis is longer in disappearing in the old than in the young. Mr. Watson, of Edinburgh, found effused blood in an ecchymosis in an old person, five Aveeks after the infliction of the injury. Where the cellular membrane is dense, the ecchymosis, ca'leris paribus, is not so rapidly formed; nor, Avhen formed, do the above changes tiike place in it so speedily as when the blood is effused into a loose portion of rnembrane like that surrounding the eye or existing in the scrotum. In some instances an ecchymosis has been observed to disappear without undergoing changes of colour at its margin. On examining an ecchvmosed portion of skin ^vlnch has suffered from a severe contusion, we find that the discolouration


[453/1290 b21964944_0453.jp2]

389 EFFECT OF CONTUSIONS ON A DEAD BODY. affects more or less the whole substance of the true skin, as well as the cellular membrane beneath; it is necessary to remember this in forming an opinion. Evidence from the Fonn of an Ecchymosis.—It not unfrequently happer,s that the ecchymosis produced by a contusion will assume a form indicative of tlie means by which the violence Avas offered. In hanging, the impression caused by the coi-d on the neck is sometimes ecchymosed, and indicates its course with precision ;—so also in strangulation, when the fingers have been violently applied to the fore part of the neck, the indentations produced may serve to point out the manner in which life was destroyed. A case is men- tioned by Starkie, which shows that the form of an ecchymosis may occasion- ally furnish presumptive evidence against an accused party. In an attempt at murder, the prosecutor, in his own defence, struck the assailant violently in the face, with the key of the house-door, this being the only weapon he had near at hand. The ecchymosis which followed this contusion corre- sponded in the impression produced on the face to the wards of the key ; and it was chiefly through this very singular and unexpected source of evidence, that the assailant was afterwards identified and brought to trial. ('Law of Evidence,' vol. I, art. Circ. Ev.) Contusions on the chad.—For our knowleds-e of the effects of contusions on the recently dead body, we are chiefly indebted to Dr, Christison. This gentleman found that blows inflicted not more than two ficnirs after death, gave rise to appearances on the skin similar to those which resulted from blows inflicted on a person recently before death. The livid discolouration thus produced generally arose from an effusion of the thinnest possible layer of the fluid part of the blood on the outer surface of the true skin, but some- times also from an effusion of blood into a perceptible stratum of the true skin itself. He likewise found that dark fluid blood might even be effused into the subcutaneous cellular tissue on the seat of the discolourations, so as to blacken or redden the membranous partitions of the cells containing the fat; but this last effusion was never extensive. From this, then, it follows, that, by trusting to external appearance only, contusions made soon after death may be easily confounded with those which have been produced by violence shortly before death. If a contusion has been caused some time before death, there will be swelling of the part, and probably also certain changes of colour in the ecchymosed patch, in either of which cases there will be no difficulty in forming an opinion. Although ecchymosis, or an appearance analogous to it, may be produced on a body after death, the changes in colour are then met Avith only under peculiar circumstances, to be pi-esently mentioned. If the blood found beneath an ecchymosed spot is in a state of coagulum (clotted), this will afford a presumption of its having been effused during life, although, strictly speaking, it only proves that the effusion must have taken place eithei- before death, or very soon after it. The experiments related, in speaking of incised wounds, show that blood effused from a wound ten minutes after death, may be found in a coagulated state. (See page 385.) Again, the circumstance of the blood effused under a contused wound being liquid, is not a proof that the effusion took place after death; for sometimes, as in death from a sudden and violent shock to the nervous system, or in cases of rupture of the heart, the effused blood does not coagulate. Blood effused into the spinal canal during life is often fluid, and it is well known that blood may be found coagulated in some parts of the body, while it remains uncoagulated in others. There is reason to believe that the blood coagulates more slowly in tlie dead body than in a vessel into which it has been drawn during life or after death. The blood may remain fluid in a dead body from lour to eight, and, according to Donne, as long as twcuve hours after death.


[454/1290 b21964944_0454.jp2]

3U0 CONTUSlOiNS DUKING LIFE AND AFTEK DEATH. (' Cours d(; Microscopie,' 52.) It rarely begins to coagulate until after the Inpse of four hours; but if drawn from a blood-vessel and exposed to air, it ■would coagulate in a few minutes after its removal. In general, contusions which have been produced during life, and in which the eifused blood remains liquid, may be recognized by the extent of the effusion. If, under the ecchymosed parts, we find a large quantity of liquid blood, and the seat of injury is so situated that the blood could not have become infiltrated into it, and at the same time there is no ruptured vein from which it might have flowed, we may confidently pronounce that the effusion must have preceded death. In a dead body, a contusion would cause but little extravasation, unless a vein of large size had been torn through. The sign which is most satisfactory as a criterion, in the opinion of Dr. Christison, is, however, the following :—In a contusion inflicted during life, the ecchymosed portion of cutis (true skin) is generally dark and much discoloured by the infiltration of blood throughout its whole thickness; the skin at the same time is increased in firmness and tenacity. This is not, however, a .uniform consequence of a contusion during life; for a blow m:iy cause effusion of blood beneath the skin without affecting the cutis in the manner stated. The state of the skin here described, cannot, however, be ])roduced by a contusion on a dead body; although it is still an open ques- tion, whether it might not be produced if the contusion were inflicted a few minutes after death. As it is, the value of this sign is somewhat circum- scribed,—it is not always produced on the living,—it might be possibly produced on the recently dead ; so that when it does not exist, we must look for other differential marks, and when it does exist, Ave ought to satisfy ourselves that the contusion was not inflicted recently after death. The period at which such injuries cease to resemble each other, has not been fixed with any degree of precision; but, as in the case of incised Avounds, it Avould seem that there is little danger of confounding them, Avhea a contusion has not been inflicted on a dead body until after the disappear* ance of animal heat and the commencement of cadaveric rigidity. Dr» Christison found that sometimes the appearance of contusions could liardly ba produced on a dead body tAvo hours after death ; on other occasions they miglit be sliglitly caused after three hours and a quarter, but this period is near the extreme limit. Whenever the warmth of the body and the laxity of th# muscles are not considerable at the time the bloAv is inflicted, the appearance of contusions during life cannot be distinctly produced. It is, therefore, only on the trunk that even in the most favourable state of the laody,—namely> Avhen warmth is retained and the blood remains altogether liquid,—that a mark resembling a contusion on the living body can be produced so late as tiL-o hours after death, (' Ed. Med. and Surg. Jour.' No. 99, p. 247, et seq.) NotAvithstanding these satisfactory results, it will be seen, that from the moment of death until after a lapse of tAvo hours, contusions may be folloAved by appearances on the dead almost identical Avith those observed on the living. The earliest period after death in Avhich an experiment Avas tried on the human body was o?ie hour and three quarters : in this case the similarity Avas so strong, that Ave may infer, if the experiments had been performed Avithin half an hour, or even an hour after dissolution, it Avould have been difficult to say Avhether the blow producing the discolouration, had been inflicted on a living or dead body. Dr. Christison's experiments lead to the conclusion that sevei-e bloAvs inflicted on a recently dead body, produce no greater degree of ecchymosis or cutaneous discolouration than slight blows inflicted on the living. Assuming that the great extent of an ecchymosis wordd in all cases serve to shoAV that the violence in producing it had been .inflicted during life, it must be remembered that the importance of these facts,


[455/1290 b21964944_0455.jp2]

ECCHYMOSIS OX THE LIVING AND DEAD BODY. 301 in relation to medical evidence, is not affected by the extent of the dis- colouration. It may be just as necessmy to have a positive opinion on the origin of a slight, as on tlie origin of an extensive bruise. Trivial ecchymoses, as in cases of strangulation, if they can be certaiidy pronounced vital, may make all the difference between the acquittal and conviction of a person charged with murder. Again, slight ecchymosis on the bodies of the drowned may excite a suspicion of strangulation and subsequent immersion of the body in water. So in reference to child-murder. An infant may be destroyed by violence, and only a i'ew slight marks of ecchymosis found upoii its body. Irrespective of the extent of an ecchymosis, the great point for a medical witness to consider is, whether it occurred during life or after death. Cases in which a mistake might easily have arisen, will be related in speaking of marks of violence on the drowned. The practical inference, then, is, that these discolourations of the s\in caused *fter death, are liable to be mistaken for marks of violence on the living body. An instance has been communicated to me, on respectable authority, in which, for the sake of experiment, blows with a stick were inflicted on the recently dead body of a lemalc, while still warm. The body ■was afterwards accidentally seen by non-professional persons, who were not aware of the performance of these experiments; and so strong was the impression from the appearances, that the deceased had been maltreated during life, that a judicial inquiry was actualh'^ instituted, when the circum- stances were satislixctorily explained. The fact, therefore, that severe blows after death resemble slight blows during life, is, in a practical view, unim- portant. It does nqt aid our diagnosis, nor prevent serious mistakes from occurring. Ecchi/mosis from natural causes in the living.—There are certain conditions of the living body in which ccchymosed mai'ks are found on the skin: a witness must be careful not to confound these marks with ecchymosis arising from violence. First with regard to the living body,—in aged persons, it is not luuisual to find the legs and feet covered with livid patches, sometimes of considerable uniformity of colour, and at others much mottled. These dis- colourations, which, after death, might be mistaken for ecchymosis from violence, arise from the languor of the capillary circulation in such persons : the blood with difficulty finds its way through the venous capillaries, and the marks are commonly observed on the lower parts of the body, because they are far removed from the centre of circulation, and the blood has to rise conti-ary to gravitation. This is the condition which has been denominated by Andral, asthenic hyperaimia. (Andral, ' Anat. Pathol.' t. 1, p. 40.) Similar discolourations are sometimes met with on the bodies of those who have died from scurvy, typhus, and other adynamic diseases. In persons severely affected with scurvy, it is well known that the slightest pressure on any part of the skin will suffice to produce a spot resembling the ecchymosis of violence, and arising like it from a rupture of minute cutaneous vessels ; but the effusion of blood, which causes the discolouration, is commonly con- fined to the superficial layers of the true skin. These patches, under certain states of the system, occur spontaneously, and often cover the body to a great extent: when small, they take the name of petechia;, but when extensive, in which case they bear some resemblance to the ecchymosis of violence, they constitute the pathognomonic character of the disease termed purpura. To all these effusions of blood in the living body, the term Sugillation (from sngillatio, a black mark) has been applied. Some medical jm-ists have attempted to draw a distinction between ecchymosis and sugillation : thus it is said, ecchymosis proceeds from external, sugillation froui internal, causes ; ecchymosis is confined to the marks which occur in the living body, sugilla-


[456/1290 b21964944_0456.jp2]

392 ECCHYMOSIS IN THE DEAD BODY. tiou to those -Nvliich occur in the dead :—in ccchyniosis the vessels are ruptured, in sugillation there is mere congestion; again, some have con- sidered that ecchymosis and sugillation might take i)lace both in tlie hving and the dead, (lienke, ' Zeitschrift dcr S. A.' vol. 1, p. 199, and 'Ann. d'Hyg.' ]838, vol. 2, p. 3«3.) From this statement, it appears impossible to give a consistent definition of the meaning of cither of these terms : but it is altogether unnecessary to make the attempt, for the error, after all, consists in tiie introduction of a superfluity of Avords to express a simple condition of the body, depending on different causes. Why. according to the view taken by Chaussier, an ecchymosis should not also be called a sugillation, it is difficult to say : for the definitions above given create no real distinction. I would advise a medical jurist to avoid the use of the term sugillation, if by employing it he considers that he is speaking of a condition essentially different from ecchymosis. It may be occasionally necessary to distinguish ecchymoses in the living body arising from infirmity or disease, from those Avhich have their origin from violence. In regard to the spots or patches on the legs of old persons, their great extent, enveloping as they often do the whole circumference of a leg, is sufficient to establish a clear distinction. In distinguishing the spots of jmrpura^ a difficulty may some- times exist, but here also the appearance of the subject, the general diffusion of the spots over the whole of the body, and their simultaneous existence on the mucous membrane of the throat and alimentary canal, cannot fail to point out that they originate from some other cause than violence. In the living, these spots have been observed to undergo the same changes of colour as the true ecchymosis of violence. It has been alleged, on the authority of Zacchias, one of the early Avriters on medical jurisprudence, that a distinction is obtained in these cases after death by a dissection of the part. According to this authority, in what is termed sugil- lation, i.e., the ecchymosis of disease, the blood is fluid, while in the ecchy- mosis of violence it is described as being in a thick and concrete state. In the remarks already made respecting contusions, facts have been mentioned Avhich show that such a distinction is inadmissible ; neither the state of th(? blood nor its situation will alone suffice to determine the question. Although it has been usual to describe the ecchymosis of disease as being due to a super- ficial extravasation on the true skin, yet certain cases recorded by pathologists prove that in purpura or scurvy, the discolouration may occasionally extend through the whole substance of the skin to the fatty tissue beneath. Ecchymosis in the dead body. Lividity.—Ecchymosis may present itself in various forms on the skin of a dead body. The first form when it occurs, is almost an immediate consequence of death, but it is not fully developed until the body has cooled. It is commonly called cadaveric lividity. It presents itself in diffused patches of great extent, sometimes covering the whole of the fore part of the chest and abdomen, at other times the lateral regions of the back. The upper or lower limbs, either on their internal or external surfaces, or on their whole circumference, are oflen thus completely ecchy- mosed. The appearance is wholly unlike the effects of external violence. (See p. 46.) Ecchymosis may be a result of putrefaction from the fluid blood escaping from a vessel. (See p. 48.) Is Ecchymosis a necessary resxdt of violence ?—This medico-legal question lias often created great difficulty to medical Avitnesses. It has been repeatedly asserted in Courts of law, that no severe blow could have been inflicted on the body of a person found dead, in consequence of the absence of ecchy- inosis or other indication of violence from the part struck; but this assertion is entirely opposed to well-ascertained facts. However true the statement may be that severe contusions are commonly Ibllowcd by ecchymosis, it is


[457/1290 b21964944_0457.jp2]

PATAL VIOLENCE WITHOUT ECCUYMOSIS. 303 open to numerous exceptions; and iniless these are known to a practitioner, liis evidence may mislead the Coiu't. The presence of ecchymosis is com- monly presumptive evidence of the infliction of violence, but its absence does not negative this presumption. It was long since remarked by Portal, that the spleen had been found ruptured from blows or falls, Avithout any ecchymosis or abrasion of the skin appearing in the region struck. This has been also observed in respect to ruptures of the stomach, intestines, and izrinary bladder, from violence di- rectly applied to the abdomen. Portal supposed that the mechanical impulse Avas simply transferred through the supple parietes (or skin) of the abdomen to the viscera behind, as in the striking of a bladder filled with water. Whether this be the true explanation or not, it is quite certain that the small A-essels of the skin often escape rupture from a sudden blow, so that their con- tents are not effused. A case is reported by Henke, in Avhich a labouring man died some hours after fighting with another, and on an inspection of the body the peritoneum was found extensively inflamed, owing to an escape of the contents of the small intestines, which had been ruptured to a consider- able extent. There was, however, no ecchymosis or mark on the skin externally, and the medical inspectors were inclined to affirm, contrary in this case to direct evidence, that no blow could have been struck; but others of greater expei'ience were appealed to, who at once admitted that the lacera- tion of the intestines might have been caused by a blow, even although there ■was no appearance of violence externally. Mr. Watson states that a girl, aged nine, received a smart blow upon the abdomen from a stone. She im- mediately complained of great pain ; collapse ensued, and she died in twenty- one hours. On inspection there Avas no mark of injury externally, but the ileum (small intestines) was foiind ruptured, its contents extravasated, and the peritoneum extensively inflamed. (' On Homicide,' p. 187.) Dr. Wil- liamson, of Leith, met Avith a case in Avhich a man received a kick on the abdomen from a horse : he died in thirty hours from peritonitis. The ileum Avas found to have been torn completely across in its lower third. There was not the slightest trace of ecchymosis externally, a fact Avhich is the more remarkable, since the blow Avas here struck by a somcAvhat angular or pointed l)ody—the hoof of a horse. (' Med. Gaz.' May 1840.) In a fatal railway accident Avhich occurred at Leicester in November 1854, there Avere no marks of external violence on the head, but Mr. Macaulay found a laceration of the left hemisphere of the brain, Avith effusion of a large quantity of blood Avhich had coagulated. Many ca.ses might be adduced in support of the statement that ecchymosis is not a necessary or constant result of a severe blow; but those above related sufficiently establish the fact. This medico-legal question frequently arises in cases in Avhich ihe bladder or liver is ruptured, as, OAving to the general absence of marks of violence, it is often alleged in defence that no blow or kick could have been inflicted on this part of the abdomen. The incorrectness of this vieAV Avill be apparent by a reference to cases of ruptured bladder related in another part of this Avork. I am indebted to Dr. Eastou of Glasgow, for a case of rupture of the liver, under circumstances in Avhich ecchymosis Avould have been generally expected to take place as a result of violence. In January 1852, a Avoman, aged seventy-five, Avas run down by a cab in the streets of GlasgoAV, and died in less than half an hour. No ecchymosis existed, although four ribs on the right side of the chest at tlie lower part Avere broken, and the liver Avas ruptured in two places longitudi- nally, and throughout the entii'e length of its anterior and convex surface. The laceration of this organ had not been caused by the fractured ends of the ribs penetrating doAvnAvards, for of these there Avas no displacement, but the


[458/1290 b21964944_0458.jp2]

EVIDEXCE OF THE USE OF A WEAl'ON. 39-1 organ seemed to have bui-st in consequence of tlie lieavy compression to which it had been subjected, which had not, however, been sufficient to occasion any discoloTu-ation of the skin externally. The following case was tried before the Justiciary Court of Glasgow, in January 1837. A woman was found dead in her' house, and her husband was accused of having murdered her. There was no mark of violence externally; but on opening the abdomen, the liver was found extensively lacerated, and there was no doubt that this was the cause of death. A medical witness asserted, that as there was no appear- ance of injury externally, the rupture could not have been caused by a lall or a blow. He attributed the absence of marks of ecchymosis to the rupture liaving been occasioned by the forcible pressure of some heavy rounded smooth body on the abdomen. The prisoner was acquitted on a verdict of not proven. The liver is seldom ruptured except from violence directly applied, and it is observed that the rupture is more commonly caused by a sudden than by a slow application of violence. The explanation given by the witness would neither account for the rupture nor for the absence of ecchymosis ; I'or these conditions are more commonly met with under directly opposite circumstances. At the same time, in cases where the facts are im- perfectly known, a surgeon must not be too ready to assume, in the absence of ecchymosis or abrasion, that violence has been directly applied and has caused the rupture of an internal organ. The liver may have been ruptured in the above case either by a blow or a fall,—the absence of ecchymosis in the skin of the abdomen is not inconsistent with either view. That murderous vio- lence may be produced by blows on a body without leaving any external anarks, is further proved by a case tried in Scotland (^Cuming tor the murder of his wife, Dec. 19, 1853). The woman died from a severe injury to the head, but she chiefly complained of great pain in one of her breasts, and in her chest on that side. From her statement it appeared that the prisoner had used great violence to this part of her body; yet on a careful examination, during life and after death, there were no marks of ecchjanosis or contitsion. The case of Slater and Vivian (Central Crim. Court, Sept. 18G0), charged with the manslaughter of a limatic at Colney Hatch Asylum, presents many points of importance in reference to this medico-legal question. (Winslow'!i *Med. Critic, and Psychological Journal,' No. 1, Jan. 7, 1861, p. 91.) CHAPTER 33. EVIDENCE OF THE USE OF A WEAPON CHAUACTERS OF WOUNDS CAUSED BT WEAPONS INCISED, PUNCTURED, LACERATED, AND CONTUSED AVOUNDS STABS AND CUTS—WHAT ARE WEAPONS ? EXAMINATION OF THE DRESS WOUNDS PRO- DUCED THROUGH THE DRESS. Evidence of the use of a weapon.—It is not necessary to prove that a weapon has been used for the production of a Avound, for the words of the new statute are :—' "Whosoever shall, bt/ ani/ means ivhatsoever, wound or cause any grievous bodily harm to a person,' &c.; yet evidence of the use of a weapon in cases of assault may materially affect the amount of punishment awarded on conviction. When, upon the clearest evidence, it is certain that a weapon has been used, it is not imusual for prisoners to declare that no weapon was employed by them, but that the wound had been occasioned by accidental circumstances. A witness should remember that he is seldom in a position to swear that a particular weapon produced at a trial, must have been i used by the prisoner :—he is only justified in saying, that the wound was ^ caused either by it or by one similar to it. Schworer relates the following'


[459/1290 b21964944_0459.jp2]

305 CHARACTERS OF WOLWDS PRODUCED BY WEAFO.XS. case. A man was stabbed by anotlier in the face, and a knife witli the blade entire, was brought forward as circumstantial evidence against him,—tin; surgeon having stated that the wound had been caused by this knife. Thf. wounded person recovered; but a year afterwards an abscess formed-in his face, and the broken point of the real weapon was discharged from it. The wound could not therefore have been produced by the knife which was brought forward as evidence against the prisoner at the trial. (' Lehre von dem Kindermorde.') Although the criminality of an act is not lessened or impugned by an occurrence of this kind, it is advisable that such mistakes should be avoided by the use of proper caution on the part of a witness. (On this question, see the case of Eenaud, by Dr. Boys de Loury, ' Ann. d'Hyg.' 1839, t. 11, p. 170. As to what is a weapon, see Henke, ' Zeitschrift der S. A.' 1844, vol. 1, p. 67.) Characters of ivounds produced hy weapons.—Let us now suppose that no weapon is discovered, and that the opinion of a Avitness is to be founded only on an examination of a wound. It is right for him to know that on all criminal trials, considerable importance is attached by the laAV to the fact of a wound having been caused by the use of a Aveapon; since this generally implies malice, and in most cases a greater desire to injure the party assailed than the mere employment of manual force. Some wounds, such as cuts and stabs, at once indicate that they must have been produced by Aveajjons. 1. Incised ivounds.—In incised Avounds, the sharpness of the instrument may be inferred from the cleanness and regularity Avith which the edges arc cut: in stabs, also, the form and depth of a Avound Avill often indicate the kind of Aveapon employed. Stabs sometimes have the characters of incised punctures, one or both extremities of the Avound being cleanly cut, according to Avhether the Aveapon Avas single or double-edged. Dupuytren has remarked that such stabs, oAving to the elasticity of the skin, are apparently smaller than the Aveapon—a point to be remembered in instituting a comparison betAveen the size of a Avound and the instrument. A lateral motion of the Aveapon may, JioAvever, cause a considerable enlargement of tlie Avound. (See case, ' Ann. d'Hyg.' 1847, t. 1, p. 400.) When a stab has traversed the body, the entrance-aperture is commonly larger than the aperture of exit; and its edges, contrary to Avhat miglit be supposed, are sometimes everted, owing to the rapid AvithdraAval of the instrument. That facts of this kind should be available as evidence, it is necessary that the body should be seen soon after the infliction of a Avound, and belbre there has been any interference Avith it. Punctured ivounds.—It is necessary to notice Avhether the edges of a pimc- tured Avound are lacerated and irregular, or incised; because it may be alleged in defence, that the Avound Avas produced by a fall on some substance cai)able of causing an injury someAvhat resembling it. In a case that occuiTed to Mr. Watson, a deeply penetrating Avound on the genital organs of the de- ceased, Avhich had evidently caused the woman's death, Avas ascribed by the prisoners charged with the murder, to her having fallen on some broken glass; but it Avas proved that the edges of the wound were bounded everyAvhere by clean incisions, Avhich rendered this defence inconsistent, if not impossible. I have knoAvn a similar defence made on tAvo other occasions, Avhere the cases came to trial. In one, a man struck the prosecutor, and knocked him against a AvindoAV. On examination, there were three deep cuts on the face of the prosecutor, but no Aveapon had been seen in the hands of the prisoner. He Avas charged Avith cutting and .stabbing. The surgeon deposed that the Avounds appeared to have been inflicted Avith a knife or razor-blade, and not by broken glass. If the AVOunds had been made by glass, particles of that substance Avould probably have been found in them, but there Avere none. Tlie prisoner Avas acquitted, the infliction ol" the AVOunds by a Aveapon not being considered


[460/1290 b21964944_0460.jp2]

39G WOUNDS TRODUCED BY GLASS OE EARTHEXWAEE. to liave been sufficiently made out. In another case that occurred in August 1841, the prosecutor Avas kno(;ked down, and his throat was found severely cut, but there was no direct proof that a weapon had been used. In the defence it was in-ged that the wound had been produced by a broken pane of glass, but the surgeon described it as a clean cut, five inches in length and one inch in depth, laying bare the carotid artery. He considered that it must have been inflicted by a razor or knife, and that it was a cut made by one stroke of the instrument. In Reg. v. Ankers (Warwick Lent Assizes, 1845), a clean cut as irom a penknife, about two inches long and one deep, was proved to have existed on the person of the prosecutor, who had fallen during a quarrel with the prisoner. Some broken crockery was lying near the spot, and it was alleged in the defence that a fall iipon this had caused the Avound. This allegation was quite inconsistent with the clean and even appearance of the edges of the wound. The prisoner, in Avhose possession a penknife had been found, Avas convicted. In general, Avounds made hy glass or earthenware are characterized by their great irregularity and the unevenness of their edges. Cases of this kind show that as it is not ahvays possible to knoAv Avhen this sort of defence may be raised, a medical Avitness should never fail to make a minute examination of a Avound Avhich is suspected to have been ci-iminally inflicted. A trial for murder took place at the Worcester Summer Assizes, in 1838, in which it appeared in evidence that the deceased had died from a small punctured Avound in the thorax. It Avas UA^e inches and a half deep; it had completely traversed the right ventricle of the heart, and had led to death by loss of blood. The Avound Avas supposed to have been produced by a small skeAver, Avhich was found near the spot, but in the defence it was alleged that the deceased had fallen over a tub, and that the Avound had been caused by a projecting nail. This allegation, however, Avas negatived by the surgeon, from the fact of its being a clean cut Avound. Had it been produced in the manner alleged by the prisoners, this Avould have been indicated by an irregularity of margin. In the case of Bryant (Taunton Lent Assizes, 1849), Avhich involved a charge of maliciously stabbing the prosecutor, the defence Avas that many flints Avere lying about in the road, and as the assault took place in the dai-k, the Avound might have been inflicted accidentally during a lall. The medical witness could not say that the Avounds had been positively caused by a Aveapon : they might have been produced by the flints. The prisoner Avas acquitted, as the statute then required proof that a Avound had been inflicted by some instrument. A careful examination made at the time of the injury Avould most probably have enabled the Avitness to give a decided opinion, instead of leaving the case open to doubt. A puncture made by a flint during a fall is not likely to resemble a stab Avith a knife. The Avouud Avould present some marks of laceration and great irregularity. As the Avound was under the ear, it was by no means probable, from the situation that it could have been thus caused accidentally. These medical difficulties are noAv for the nwst part removed by the 24th and 25th Victoria, Chapter 100. This must not, hoAvever, lead the witness to suppose that a personal injuiy is not to be carefully examined Avith a vieAV to the determination of this question. In January 1853, ]\Ir. Hancock Avas enabled, by the careful examination of a Avound, to disprove a charo-e of maliciously Avounding made against innocent persons. A little gir^Avas represented to have received, while sitting over an iron gratin"-, a Avound in the pudendum, by some persons pushing a toasting-fork or pointed instrument between the bars of the grating from beloAv. There were no marks of punctures, Avhich Avould have been found had this statement been true, but a slight laceration of the parts, such as might have been produced by an
